Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
1 of 37
A new early branching armored 
dinosaur from the Lower Jurassic of 
southwestern China
Xi Yao1†, Paul M Barrett2†, Lei Yang3, Xing Xu1,4,5*, Shundong Bi1,6*
1Centre for Vertebrate Evolutionary Biology, Yunnan University, Kunming, China; 
2Department of Earth Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom; 
3Yimen Administration of Cultural Heritage, Yimen, China; 4Key Laboratory of 
Evolutionary Systematics of Vertebrates, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology 
and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; 5Center for 
Excellence in Life and Paleoenvironment, Beijing, China; 6Department of Biology, 
Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, United States
Abstract The early evolutionary history of the armored dinosaurs (Thyreophora) is obscured by 
their patchily distributed fossil record and by conflicting views on the relationships of Early Jurassic 
taxa. Here, we describe an early diverging thyreophoran from the Lower Jurassic Fengjiahe Forma-
tion of Yunnan Province, China, on the basis of an associated partial skeleton that includes skull, 
axial, limb, and armor elements. It can be diagnosed as a new taxon based on numerous cranial and 
postcranial autapomorphies and is further distinguished from all other thyreophorans by a unique 
combination of character states. Although the robust postcranium is similar to that of more deeply 
nested ankylosaurs and stegosaurs, phylogenetic analysis recovers it as either the sister taxon 
of Emausaurus or of the clade Scelidosaurus+ Eurypoda. This new taxon, Yuxisaurus kopchicki, 
represents the first valid thyreophoran dinosaur to be described from the Early Jurassic of Asia and 
confirms the rapid geographic spread and diversification of the clade after its first appearance in the 
Hettangian. Its heavy build and distinctive armor also hint at previously unrealized morphological 
diversity early in the clade’s history.
Editor's evaluation
This paper reports a new species of armored dinosaur from rocks in southwestern China dated to 
the beginning of the Jurassic Period. This represents the first valid species of armored dinosaur from 
the Early Jurassic in Asia, as although the presence of armored dinosaurs in Asia has been docu-
mented for decades based on isolated jaw bones referred to Thyreophora- the group of armored 
dinosaurs- none that material was complete enough for diagnosis to a known or new species. This 
new specimen demonstrates the rapid diversification and distribution of armored dinosaurs across 
the northern hemisphere early in their evolutionary history.
Introduction
Thyreophoran dinosaurs were important components of many terrestrial faunas from the Late Jurassic 
until the end of the Cretaceous, particularly in Laurasia (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003; Galton, 2004; 
Arbour and Currie, 2015; Maidment et al., 2020). However, many aspects of their earlier evolu-
tionary history remain contentious and poorly known. The majority of late Mesozoic armored dino-
saurs belonged to one of two major lineages—Ankylosauria or Stegosauria—whose earliest members 
RESEARCH ARTICLE
*For correspondence: 
xu.xing@ivpp.ac.cn (XX); 
sbi@iup.edu (SB)
†These authors contributed 
equally to this work
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 32
Received: 03 November 2021
Preprinted: 25 November 2021
Accepted: 02 February 2022
Published: 15 March 2022
Reviewing Editor: George 
H Perry, Pennsylvania State 
University, United States
   Copyright Yao et al. This 
article is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
2 of 37
are currently known from the Middle Jurassic (Galton, 1983; Salgado et al., 2017; Maidment et al., 
2020; Maidment et  al., 2021). Almost all recent analyses of ornithischian interrelationships have 
united these two lineages in a clade named Eurypoda, which is thought to have originated sometime 
in the Early–early Middle Jurassic (e.g., Sereno, 1999; Norman et al., 2004; Butler et al., 2008; 
Boyd, 2015; Dieudonné et al., 2021).
However, several possible Early Jurassic thyreophorans lack key ankylosaurian and stegosaurian 
synapomorphies. These include Laquintasaura and Lesothosaurus, which are recovered as early, unar-
mored thyreophorans by some phylogenetic analyses (Butler et al., 2008; Boyd, 2015; Baron et al., 
2017a) but placed in alternative positions outside Thyreophora in others (Sereno, 1999; Dieudonné 
et  al., 2021). Less controversially, three other taxa are consistently recovered as early diverging 
members of the clade: Scutellosaurus lawleri (Sinemurian–Toarcian, Kayenta Formation, USA; Colbert, 
1981; Rosenbaum and Padian, 2000; Breeden and Rowe, 2020; Breeden et al., 2021), Emausaurus 
ernsti (early Toarcian, unnamed unit, Germany; Haubold, 1990), and Scelidosaurus harrisonii (Sinemu-
rian–early Pliensbachian, Charmouth Mudstone Formation, UK; Owen, 1861; Owen, 1863; Norman, 
2020a; Norman, 2020b; Norman, 2020c).
Most recent studies have concluded that Scutellosaurus, Emausaurus, and Scelidosaurus are 
successive sister taxa to Eurypoda (Sereno, 1999; Norman et al., 2004; Butler et al., 2008; Boyd, 
2015; Dieudonné et al., 2021). However, an alternative hypothesis suggests that Scelidosaurus was 
the sister taxon of Ankylosauria, together forming the clade Ankylosauromorpha, which in turn is the 
sister group of Stegosauria. This relationship was first proposed formally by Carpenter, 2001 and 
received support from Norman, 2021; but see Results, below. Testing these alternatives will rely on 
the discovery of new material and on the construction of larger phylogenetic data matrices including 
more characters suited to unraveling early thyreophoran relationships.
Two probable thyreophoran taxa have been described from the Early Jurassic of China—‘Bieno-
saurus lufengensis’ and ‘Tatisaurus oehleri’—both erected on the basis of fragmentary material from 
the Lower Jurassic Lufeng Formation of Yunnan Province (Simmons, 1965; Dong, 2001). However, in 
both cases, the material is insufficient to support their validity and these taxa are currently regarded as 
nomina dubia, although the material does exhibit thyreophoran characteristics (Norman et al., 2007; 
Raven et al., 2019). Consequently, these specimens offer little useful information on thyreophoran 
evolution, although they do extend the range of the clade to East Asia at this time, suggesting that 
the group achieved a global (or at least pan- Laurasian) distribution soon after its origin (Raven et al., 
2019).
Here, we describe a new thyreophoran taxon from the Lower Jurassic Fengjiahe Formation of 
Yunnan Province, southwestern China on the basis of a partial skeleton and discuss its significance for 
early ornithischian evolution.
eLife digest From the plated Stegosaurus to the tank- like Ankylosaurus, armoured dinosaurs are 
some of the most extraordinary creatures to have roamed the earth. Fossils from this group are abun-
dant from the Late Jurassic period, 155 million years ago, up until the end of the age of the dinosaurs. 
However, only a few fossils exist from the early part of the Jurassic, making it difficult to understand 
how these fantastic beasts came to be. More early fossils could help to fill in gaps about armoured 
dinosaur biology and evolution.
Yao et al. describe the anatomy of a new armoured dinosaur, baptized Yuxisaurus, which was found 
in rocks of Early Jurassic age in southwestern China. Covered in sharp spines, this medium- sized 
animal was much sturdier and stockier than its immediate relatives, suggesting that the ancestors of 
Stegosaurus and Ankylosaurus had a wider variety of body forms than once thought. Its presence in 
China also shows that armoured dinosaurs spread across the world early in their history. Yuxisaurus 
could help researchers to understand how million years of evolution produced the armoured species 
we are more familiar with today. As more fossils may emerge from the rocks of southwestern China, it 
could become possible to further piece together early dinosaur evolution.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
3 of 37
Geological setting
The main exposures of the Fengjiahe Formation are found in the Chuxiong Basin and Yiliang region of 
central and northeastern Yunnan, respectively (Figure 1A and B). It consists primarily of dull purplish 
and dark red mudstone and siltstone, mixed with yellowish or greyish green siltstone and quartz sand-
stone, calcareous mudstone, and nodules (Fang et al., 2008). Pang et al., 2002 recognized a transi-
tion bed between the underlying coal- bearing Shezi Formation and the overlying Fengjiahe Formation 
and designated this transitional bed as a new lithostratigraphic unit, the Yubacun Formation. This 
revision resulted in the separation of the lower variegated beds from the overlying purple sediments 
of the Fengjiahe Formation (Pang et al., 2002). Although the presence of the Yubacun Formation in 
the Jiaojiadian area has not been confirmed, the lower greyish- green sandstones formerly referred 
to as the Fengjiahe Formation in this area coincide well with the lithology of the Yubacun Formation 
and are now considered to represent this unit (Figure 1C). Here, therefore, we restrict the Fengjiahe 
Formation to the sequence above these greyish- green sandstones (Figure 1C).
The Fengjiahe Formation is currently thought to be a lateral equivalent of the Lufeng Formation, 
which crops out in the adjacent Lufeng Basin (Fang et al., 2008). Biostratigraphical correlations 
Figure 1. Geographical and stratigraphic location of Yuxisaurus kopchicki CVEB21701. (A) Location of the quarry yielding Yuxisaurus kopchicki, with a 
red star indicating the locality. (B) Sediments of the Fengjiahe Formation at the quarry site. (C) Stratigraphic column of the Fengjiahe Formation in the 
Jiaojiadian area (modified from Bai, 1999).
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
4 of 37
based on fossil vertebrates have suggested that the Lufeng Formation is Lower Jurassic (Hettangian–
Sinemurian) in age (Luo and Wu, 1994), and the similar vertebrate fauna and correlations based on 
invertebrate and micropaleontological material from the Fengjiahe Formation are consistent with 
this (Chen et al., 1982). However, more recent magnetostratigraphic evidence posits a younger 
age for the Lufeng Formation, namely late Sinemurian–Toarcian (Huang et al., 2005). Although 
it has not yielded as many vertebrate fossils as the Lufeng Formation, the Fengjiahe Formation 
has produced several important early sauropodomorph dinosaurs, such as Chinshakiangosaurus 
chunghoensis, Irisosaurus yimenensis, Lufengosaurus huenei, Yunnanosaurus huangi, Y. robustus, 
and Yimenosaurus yangi, as well as the theropod Shuangbaisaurus anlongbaoensis and dinosaur 
footprints (Zhen et al., 1986; Bai et al., 1990; Bai, 1999; Dong, 2001; Upchurch et al., 2007; 
Wang et al., 2017; Peyre de Fabrègues et al., 2020). The new thyreophoran was discovered in the 
upper part of the Fengjiahe Formation, as is usually the case for the vertebrate material recovered 
from this stratum.
Results
Systematic paleontology
Dinosauria Owen, 1842
Ornithischia Seeley, 1887
Thyreophora Nopcsa, 1915 (sensu Sereno, 1998)
Yuxisaurus kopchicki gen. et sp. nov.
 urn: lsid: zoobank. org: pub: 6C8204FE- 1A51- 4E7D- B9B5- BE9939460D6E
Figure 2. Skeletal reconstruction of Yuxisaurus kopchicki showing some of the main preserved elements from the holotype (highlighted in blue), with 
details of the skull bones (A), cervical vertebrae (B), dorsal vertebrae (C), left scapula (D), right humerus (E), and left femur (F). Scale bars equal 5 cm 
(A–C) or 10 cm (D–F). The facial region and distal scapula are mirrored. Osteoderms have been omitted for convenience.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
5 of 37
Holotype
CVEB (Centre for Vertebrate Evolutionary Biology, Yunnan University) 21,701 a partial skeleton with 
cranial and associated postcranial elements (Figure  2), including: the right- hand side of the skull 
(fused maxilla, lacrimal, nasal, prefrontal, jugal, and supraorbitals); braincase; partial skull roof; poste-
rior parts of the hemimandibles; four articulated cervical vertebrae; five dorsal vertebrae; left proximal 
and right distal scapulae; right humerus; left distal femur; more than 120 osteoderms; and several 
unidentifiable elements.
Etymology
The generic name refers to the type locality in Yuxi Prefecture, with the suffix -saurus from the Greek, 
meaning reptile. The specific name is after Dr. John J. Kopchick in recognition of his contributions to 
biology and the IUP Science Building.
Horizon and locality
Upper part of the Fengjiahe Formation, near Jiaojiadian village, Yimen County, Yuxi Prefecture, Yunnan 
Province, China; late Sinemurian–Toarcian (Huang et al., 2005; Figure 1C).
Diagnosis
A medium- sized armored dinosaur that can be distinguished from all other thyreophorans by the 
following autapomorphies: deep, subtriangular, dorsoventrally elongated depression on either side of 
the nuchal crest; a ‘V’-shaped notch on the dorsal margin of the paroccipital process; basal tubera that 
are considerably ventrally offset with respect to the occipital condyle, so that they are clearly visible 
in posterior view; basipterygoid processes that are ventrally offset with respect to the basal tubera, 
creating a dorsoventrally deep, ‘stepped’ basicranial profile in lateral view; cultriform process ventrally 
offset with respect to the occipital condyle in lateral view; angular with elongate, dorsally deflected 
posterior process that almost reaches the posterior margin of the retroarticular process; atlas inter-
centrum with symmetrical anterolaterally directed low ridges and associated arrow- like depressions 
on its ventral surface; relatively short anterior cervical centra (length/height ratio<1.5); cervical centra 
lack ventral keels; border of the medial condyle of the distal femur invaginated to form a broad, 
‘U’-shaped trough.
In addition, Yuxisaurus can be distinguished from other early thyreophorans using the following 
combination of character states: antorbital fossa subtriangular in outline, unlike that of Scelidosaurus, 
and with rounded corners, unlike that in Scutellosaurus; anterior ramus of the jugal projects postero-
ventrally, rather than horizontally as in Emausaurus, Scelidosaurus, and Scutellosaurus; maxillary 
tooth row bowed medially to a greater degree than in Emausaurus, Scelidosaurus, or Scutellosaurus; 
maxillary tooth crowns bearing well- defined ridges, which are absent in Emausaurus, Scelidosaurus, 
and Scutellosaurus; a relatively short axial neural spine with a sinuous dorsal margin in lateral view, 
contrasting with the straight margin and significant posterior expansion of the neural spine present 
in Scelidosaurus; elongate axial rib, which extends to the midpoint of cervical vertebra 3, unlike the 
shorter rib present in Scelidosaurus; absence of lateral ridge on the axial rib, which is present in 
Scelidosaurus; proximal and distal expansions of the humerus relatively larger than in Scelidosaurus 
and Scutellosaurus; deep notch separating the humeral head and dorsal margin of the internal tuber-
osity, which is absent in Scelidosaurus and Scutellosaurus; and broad, ‘U’-shaped fossa on ante-
rior surface of distal humerus, contrasting with the narrow, ‘V’-shaped fossae in Scelidosaurus and 
Scutellosaurus.
Remarks
The other thyreophoran taxa named from the Early Jurassic of China (‘Bienosaurus’ and ‘Tatisaurus’) 
are based on undiagnostic material (Norman et  al., 2007; Raven et  al., 2019) and have limited 
anatomical overlap with Yuxisaurus. Consequently, it is not possible to make meaningful comparisons 
between them and no shared features can be identified. As a result, additional specimens will be 
required to establish whether these three named taxa are synonymous or if multiple thyreophoran 
taxa were present in the Early Jurassic of China.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
6 of 37
Description and comparisons
General comments
The cranial bones are highly fused and the neurocentral sutures of all preserved cervical and dorsal 
vertebrae are invisible, in particular the completely obliterated axial neurocentral suture, suggesting 
that this specimen might represent an adult individual (Brochu, 1996). Compared to other closely- 
related taxa, the skull of Yuxisaurus kopchicki is larger than those of S. lawleri (Breeden and Rowe, 
2020; Breeden et al., 2021), E. ernsti (Haubold, 1990), and S. harrisonii (Natural History Museum, 
London [NHMUK] PV R1111; Norman, 2020c), and Y. kopchicki has much more robust fore- and hind-
limbs than the latter.
Figure 3. Right maxilla of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in (A) lateral, (B) medial, (C) dorsal, and (D) ventral views. Maxillary tooth row in (E) lingual view with the 
last tooth in (F) lingual view. Abbreviations: af, antorbital fenestra; afo, antorbital fossa; fenestra; aso, anterior supraorbital; ju, jugal; mrl, maxillary ramus 
of the lacrimal; mso, mesosupraorbital; orb, orbital; aso anterior supraorbital; prf, prefrontal. Scale bar equals 5 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
7 of 37
Skull and mandible
The skull includes a braincase, part of the skull roof, the co- ossified right side of the facial region 
(including the maxilla, anterior and mesosupraorbitals, lacrimal, prefrontal, jugal, and probable nasal), 
and the posterior parts of both hemimandibles (Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5, Figure 6, 
Figure 7).
Figure 4. Photographs (left) and line drawings (right) of the braincase and partial skull roof of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in left lateral (A) and right lateral 
(B) views. Abbreviations: aud, auditory recess; bo, basioccipital; bp, basipterygoid process; bs, basisphenoid; cp, cultriform process (parasphenoid 
rostrum); fm, foramen magnum; ls, laterosphenoid; n. V, exit of trigeminal nerve; n. XII, exit of cranial nerve XII; oc, occipital condyle; os, orbitosphenoid; 
oto, otoccipital; pa, parietal; pap, paroccipital process; po, postorbital; pr, prootic; pt, pterygoid; q, quadrate; sq, squamosal. Scale bar equals 5 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
8 of 37
Figure 5. Photographs (left) and line drawings (right) of the braincase of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in (A) dorsal, (B) ventral, (C) anterior, and (D) posterior 
views. Abbreviations: bo, basioccipital; bp, basipterygoid process; bs, basisphenoid; cp, cultriform process (parasphenoid rostrum); fm, foramen 
magnum; nt, ‘V’-shaped notch; n. V, exit of trigeminal nerve; oc, occipital condyle; os, orbitosphenoid; pa, parietal; pap, paroccipital process; po, 
postorbital; pt, pterygoid; q, quadrate; qd, quadrate depression; sq, squamosal. Scale bar equals 5 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
9 of 37
Maxilla
In lateral view, the right maxilla appears to be fused completely with the jugal posteriorly, the lacrimal 
posterodorsally, and the nasal medially, with few identifiable sutures. Its anterior part is broken. An 
anteroposteriorly elongated antorbital fossa excavates its lateral surface deeply. The antorbital fossa is 
rounded and subtriangular in outline with long anterodorsal and ventral margins and a short postero-
dorsal margin (Figure 3A). The fossa reaches a maximum length of 48 mm and is 20 mm in height at 
its apex. Most of the antorbital fossa is closed medially by an extensive, sheet- like medial lamina, but 
a small, oval antorbital fenestra pierces its posteroventral corner (Figure 3A). This region differs from 
that of Scelidosaurus, which has a relatively smaller antorbital fossa with a dorsoventrally narrow, ellip-
tical outline (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c), but is very similar to that of Emausaurus (Haubold, 
1990). It differs from those of Lesothosaurus (e.g., NHMUK PV RU B17; Porro et al., 2015), Scutello-
saurus (Breeden and Rowe, 2020), and Huayangosaurus ( Sereno and Dong, 1992) in having a fossa 
with smooth, rounded corners, in contrast to the sharp, angular corners seen in the latter taxa. Yuxis-
aurus also appears to lack the anterior antorbital foramen present in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020c), 
but this area is still encased in matrix.
Ventral to the antorbital fossa is the medially inset buccal emargination, which is approximately 
30- mm tall along most of its length except where the alveolar margin curves dorsally at its posterior 
end (Figure 3A). The buccal emargination is generally smooth and mildly depressed and contains 
several, small irregularly placed shallow depressions that might have been caused by weathering. 
The dorsal boundary of the buccal emargination is formed by a distinct, rounded ridge. Dorsal to this 
ridge, most of the lateral surface of the right maxilla is slightly convex, although the part anterior to 
the antorbital fossa is flat. The alveolar margin is scalloped in lateral view.
Figure 6. Possible skull roof fragment of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in (A) dorsal, (B) lateral, and (C) ventral views. 
Abbreviations: cd, channel- like depression; d, dome. Scale bar equals 5 cm.
Figure 7. Mandibular remains of Yuxisaurus kopchicki. Posterior part of left hemimandible in (A) lateral, (B) ventral, (C) medial, and (D) dorsal views. 
Posterior part of right hemimandible in (E) lateral, (F) ventral, (G) medial, and (H) dorsal views. Abbreviations: af, adductor fossa; an, angular; c, 
concavity; cor, coronoid; cor.em, coronoid eminence; pr, prearticular; sa, surangular; sf, surangular foramen. Scale bar equals 5 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
10 of 37
In medial view, a series of small rounded replacement foramina, which correspond one- to- one with 
the alveolar sockets, lies immediately above the alveolar margin (Figure 3B). The rest of the surface 
dorsal to the alveolar margin is smoothly convex, producing a vertical flange that extends dorsally 
for a short distance. The dorsal margin of this flange bears a shallow horizontal trough, which curves 
laterally anteriorly as well as posteriorly to communicate with the antorbital fenestra. It then continues 
posteroventrally for 21 mm (Figure 3B). The dorsal boundary of the flange is straight and oblique ante-
riorly, but curves downward posteriorly. Another groove starting halfway along the above- mentioned 
trough extends posteriorly and expands into an elongated deep sulcus (Figure 3B and C). This groove 
probably represents the articular contact between the maxilla and the lacrimal/jugal. The bone sand-
wiched between these two grooves has a dorsal concavity terminating posteriorly in a blunt process, 
which grades into the deep fossa mentioned above.
The antorbital fenestra is a rounded opening in medial view. The medial (lacrimal) lamina of the 
right maxilla is concealed medially by the anterior (medial) process of the lacrimal. The articulation 
between the lacrimal and maxilla is clear anteriorly but indistinguishable posteriorly. The posterior 
part of the medial surface dorsal to the tooth row is sculptured, probably indicating the contact 
surface with the palatine.
In ventral view, the alveolar border is bowed medially and the deflection angle between the 
anterior and posterior axes of the tooth row is approximately 148° (Figure  3D). The curvature in 
Yuxisaurus is not as extreme as that present in many ankylosaurians where the tooth row is strongly 
bowed (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003), but is greater than that in Scelidosaurus, Emausaurus, Scutel-
losaurus, and stegosaurians in which the maxillary tooth row is almost straight and only slightly curved 
(Colbert, 1981; Haubold, 1990; Sereno and Dong, 1992; Galton, 2004; Breeden and Rowe, 2020; 
Norman, 2020c; Breeden et al., 2021). Based on the number of alveoli present (Figure 3D), Yuxis-
aurus possessed at least 14 maxillary teeth.
Lacrimal
The lacrimal lacks any discernible sutures with the surrounding bones except medially (part of its 
junction with the maxilla; see above) and with the anterior supraorbital ( = palpebral) (where a curved 
groove might mark the boundary) (Figure 3A–C). Based on comparisons with other thyreophorans, 
the lacrimal is inferred to comprise the anterior margin of the orbit and to contact the maxilla anteri-
orly and ventrally, the jugal posteroventrally, and the anterior supraorbital and prefrontal dorsally and 
posteriorly. The lateral surface of the lacrimal is sculptured and rugose, particularly in the region of the 
orbital margin. Its posterior surface (i.e., the anterior margin of the orbit) is concave and rounded in 
lateral view. In the border of the orbit, a rounded opening is present, indicating the exit of the naso-
lacrimal duct. The posterior margin of the lacrimal expands medially, to form a partition that separates 
the orbit from the nasal cavity anteriorly (Figure 3B). In medial view, this wall becomes thinner as it 
curves dorsally and slightly posteriorly to approach the prefrontal. The maxillary ramus of the lacrimal 
is an anteriorly trending triangular lamina that is concave in medial view, tapering at its anterior end. 
Due to the absence of recognizable sutures, it is not possible to determine the extent of the lacrimal’s 
contribution to the antorbital fossa and fenestra.
Nasal
A small fragment of bone anterior to the right prefrontal might represent part of the right nasal 
(Figure 3A–C). However, it cannot be identified with confidence and offers no useful information.
Prefrontal
The right prefrontal roofs the nasal cavity dorsally (Figure 3A) and is flat ventrally but slightly domed in 
dorsal view (Figure 3C). It contacts the mesosupraorbital laterally and the middle supraorbital poste-
riorly. The prefrontal probably contacts the lacrimal anteriorly but this cannot be substantiated due 
to lack of a clear suture. A fractured bone anterior to the prefrontal, medial to the maxilla, probably 
belongs to the right nasal (see above).
Supraorbitals
The anterior supraorbital ( = palpebral of other ornithischians) is represented by its anterior part only, 
which occupies the upper boundary of the orbit (Figure 3A). The anterior supraorbital is a narrow, 
elongated bone, which is co- ossified with the lacrimal anteroventrally, the prefrontal anteromedially, 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
11 of 37
and the mesosupraorbital medially. Viewed laterally, the anterior supraorbital curves posterodorsally 
from the anterodorsal margin of the orbit (Figure 3A). In dorsal view, it has a rounded anterior end to 
contact the lacrimal, while its contact with the mesosupraorbital is unclear. On the dorsal surface of 
the anterior supraorbital a distinct ridge extends posterodorsally (Figure 3C). The mesosupraorbital 
is partly preserved. It bulges dorsally but is concave ventrally and contacts the anterior supraorbital 
anteriorly through an anterolateral- posteromedial directed suture that turns into a groove dorsally.
Jugal
The partly preserved right jugal articulates with the maxilla and lacrimal anteriorly. In lateral or medial 
view, the anterior ramus of the jugal projects posteriorly and slightly ventrally, whereas in dorsal or 
ventral view it extends posterolaterally (Figure 3A–D). Yuxisaurus differs from Emausaurus, Scute-
llosaurus, and Scelidosaurus, in which the anterior ramus is oriented horizontally (Haubold, 1990; 
Breeden and Rowe, 2020; Norman, 2020c; Breeden et al., 2021), but is more similar to several 
ankylosaurians, such as Pinacosaurus, Gobisaurus, Saichania, and Edmontonia, where the anterior 
ramus projects posteroventrally (Godefroit et al., 1999; Vickaryous et al., 2001; Vickaryous, 2006; 
Carpenter et al., 2011). The transverse cross- section of the jugal anterior ramus is rhomboidal but its 
posterior end is transversely compressed and dorsoventrally expanded. The posteromedial margin is 
inverted, leaving a dorsoventrally oriented embayment exposed in medial view.
Postorbital
The postorbital is represented only by the left squamosal process, which formed part of the supratem-
poral bar. This process is bullet- shaped in dorsal view with a wide anterior end and pointed posterior 
end (Figure 4A and B). It is rhomboidal in cross- section with a flat dorsal surface that lies lateral 
and dorsal to the squamosal. The postorbital formed part of the dorsal margin of the infratemporal 
fenestra, but no other details are visible.
Squamosal
The right squamosal is broken anteriorly and is slightly displaced medially, while the left squamosal 
articulates with the squamosal process of the left postorbital (Figures 4A, B, 5A and B). The squa-
mosal is broad posteriorly, tapers anteriorly, and the dorsal surface of its central body is flat (Figures 4B 
and 5A). Its anterodorsal process is about 35- mm long and extends anteriorly and a little ventrome-
dially, so that in dorsal view this process lies both medial and ventral to the squamosal process of 
the postorbital. In ventral view, this process is transversely narrow. The left anteroventral process is 
missing but this feature is preserved on the right side. It is rod- like but truncated anteriorly, and its 
dorsal part encloses a deep oval sulcus on the lateral surface (Figure 4A and B). The posteromedial 
process is dorsoventrally tall, merging with the squamosal process of the parietal posteriorly without 
a discernible suture on the posterior wall of the supratemporal fenestra. In medial view, at the base of 
the squamosal central body, is a fossa that is much broader on the right side than on the left. In lateral 
view, a similar but deeper recess is situated at the base of the squamosal central body to receive the 
quadrate head (Figure 4A and B). Posteriorly a short vertical process of the squamosal abuts the 
anterior surface of the paroccipital process (Figure 4). Viewed posteriorly, the squamosal is exposed 
dorsally, but it is positioned only slightly higher than the paroccipital process, as also occurs in Leso-
thosaurus (Sereno, 1991). By contrast, the squamosal has a much greater exposure in posterior view 
in Scelidosaurus and ankylosaurians (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003; Norman, 2020c), although the 
degree of exposure varies among stegosaurs (Gilmore, 1914; Sereno and Dong, 1992).
In dorsal view, the squamosal forms most of the medial margin of the large supratemporal 
fenestra, as well as its posterior corner. Although the boundaries of neither supratemporal fenestra 
are complete, the preserved portion on the left- hand side of the skull suggests that it had an ovate to 
subtriangular outline similar to that of Emausaurus (Haubold, 1990) and Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV 
R1111; Norman, 2020c). The squamosal also formed the posterodorsal corner of an open infratem-
poral fenestra (Figure 5A).
Quadrate
The right quadrate is partially preserved with its ventral- most part missing and the quadrate head 
displaced from the squamosal recess. In lateral view, the posterior margin of the quadrate is sinuous, 
being convex in its dorsal part but inflected at a point around one- third of its length so that ventral to 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
12 of 37
this the rest of this margin is shallowly concave (Figure 4B). In posterior view, the proximal quadrate 
bears a strong, curved crest. Although the ventral part is missing, it seems to curve ventromedially 
based on the remaining shaft. The pterygoid wing is laminar and extends anteromedially from the 
middle of the shaft to meet the quadrate ramus of the pterygoid (Figures 4B and 5B). A large oval 
depression occupies the medial surface of the pterygoid wing, as in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020c).
Parietal
The parietal fuses with its counterpart to form an hourglass- shaped compound bone in dorsal view 
that bears a prominent sagittal crest (Figure 5A). The parietal fuses fully with the laterosphenoid 
anteroventrally and the prootic posteroventrally with no traceable boundaries between them. The 
posterior portion of the right parietal is damaged. The smooth lateral surfaces are concave antero-
posteriorly but convex transversely and curve outward to form a short anterolateral process. In lateral 
view, the parietal extends to a level much higher than the squamosal (Figure  4B), in contrast to 
Scelidosaurus and stegosaurs in which the parietal is either only slightly elevated or at the same level 
(Gilmore, 1914; Sereno and Dong, 1992; Norman, 2020c). A deep sulcus is present on the main 
body of the left parietal close to the junction between the left medial and posterior supratemporal 
walls (Figure 5A), but this is not visible on the right- hand side, where it is concealed by the displaced 
squamosal. The parietal forms the medial boundary of the open supratemporal fenestra.
Pterygoid
The pterygoid is partially preserved on the right side and is situated between the quadrate and the 
basipterygoid process of the basisphenoid. In posterior view, its quadrate ramus is a fan- shaped 
lamina that extends laterodorsally to meet the pterygoid wing of the quadrate (Figure 5D). Its ventral 
margin curls dorsally to form a narrow trough that is visible in posterior view as in Lesothosaurus and 
Scelidosaurus (Sereno, 1991; Norman, 2020c).
Skull roof fragment
A broken plate- like element is tentatively identified as part of the skull roof, but it is unclear how it 
relates to the other cranial elements (Figure 6). Its most conspicuous feature is its wave- like surface 
texture, which is due to its domed external surface combined with the presence of a channel- like 
depression. This feature might be unique to Yuxisaurus, since the skull roof is generally flat in other 
thyreophorans (e.g., Haubold, 1990; Sereno and Dong, 1992; Norman, 2020c). However, given its 
uncertain identification, this element is not considered further herein.
Braincase
The occipital portion of the skull is well preserved and its broadest part reaches a maximum width 
of approximately 134 mm (measured between the distal ends of the paroccipital processes). This 
is comparable to that of Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111: c. 120 mm; N.B. the scale bar given in 
Norman, 2020c, Figure 3 is incorrect, implying that the holotype skull is twice as large as it is) and 
the Late Jurassic ankylosaurian Gargoyleosaurus (154 mm; Carpenter et al., 1998) but is substantially 
greater than the estimated total skull width of Emausaurus (83 mm; Haubold, 1990). In posterior view, 
the occipital bones appear to be completely fused with each other, and the junctions between them 
are obscured (Figure 5D). The dorsal half of the occiput is strongly inclined anteriorly. A robust nuchal 
crest immediately dorsal to the foramen magnum extends vertically to meet the parietal (Figure 5D) 
and is flatter and wider than that present in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c). 
A deep dorsoventrally elongated, subtriangular depression is present on each side of the nuchal 
crest, excavating the posterior surface of the supraoccipital (Figure 5D), likely representing insertion 
areas for the neck musculature. By contrast, the corresponding area in Scelidosaurus is very shallowly 
concave and coarsely textured (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c). The same region bears only 
a shallow concavity in ankylosaurians (e.g., Gargoyleosaurus, Pawpawsaurus, and Euoplocephalus), 
and in stegosaurs this depression is shallow in Huayangosaurus and deep and subquadrate in Stego-
saurus (Gilmore, 1914; Sereno and Dong, 1992; Lee, 1996; Carpenter et al., 1998; Vickaryous and 
Russell, 2003; Norman, 2020c). Consequently, these large, teardrop- shaped fossae are a potential 
autapomorphy of Yuxisaurus.
Dorsolateral to the foramen magnum, at the base of each paroccipital process, there is a broad 
fossa for the reception of the proatlas (Figure 5D). A pair of short, rough ridges diverge dorsolaterally 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
13 of 37
from the dorsal midline of the foramen magnum and separate the proatlantal fossae from the parasag-
ittal depressions adjacent to the nuchal crest (Figure 5D). The paroccipital process of Yuxisaurus is 
strap- like, extending laterally and slightly posteriorly from each side of the foramen magnum, as in 
some ankylosaurians (such as Pinacosaurus: Maryanska, 1971) and stegosaurs (such as Stegosaurus: 
Gilmore, 1914), whereas in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c) and some ankylosau-
rians the paroccipital process extends ventrolaterally (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003). In Yuxisaurus, 
the ventral margin of the paroccipital process is straight on the left side but slightly concave on the 
right side (Figure  5D). The distal end of the process is dorsoventrally expanded but is asymmet-
rical, so that most of this expansion occurs dorsally rather than ventrally. This asymmetrical expansion 
creates a distinct, ‘V’-shaped notch on the dorsal margin of the paroccipital process (Figure 5D). This 
notch appears to be unique to Yuxisaurus and is regarded as autapomorphic. By contrast, this margin 
is subtly concave in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c), convex in the early diverging 
ornithischian Lesothosaurus (Sereno, 1991) and is straight or slightly convex in stegosaurians and 
ankylosaurians (Gilmore, 1914; Sereno and Dong, 1992; Vickaryous and Russell, 2003; Norman, 
2020c). On the left paroccipital process, at about the same level as the concavity, lies a tongue- like 
slit, resembling the condition in Scelidosaurus, where a spur- like process indicates the position of the 
posttemporal fenestra (NHMUK PV R1111: Norman, 2020c). However, this feature is absent on the 
right- hand side, which might be the result of taphonomic distortion. The paroccipital process contacts 
the squamosal anterodorsally and the quadrate anteroventrally but is not fused with them, similar to 
the condition in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c) and stegosaurs (Gilmore, 1914; 
Sereno and Dong, 1992), but differing from ankylosaurs like Gargoyleosaurus, Talarurus, Pinaco-
saurus, Tarchia, and Euoplocephalus in which these bones are fused (Godefroit et al., 1999; Vick-
aryous and Russell, 2003). In lateral view, the distal end of the paroccipital process is sinuous, with its 
thin ventral half curving posteriorly but the thick dorsal half anteriorly (Figure 4A and B).
The foramen magnum is subelliptical in outline, with its long axis extending horizontally. The aper-
ture contains a rounded fragmentary bone, which probably represents the axial odontoid process. 
The occipital condyle was broken when separated from the cervical series, but its remaining portion 
suggests that it had a reniform outline, as also occurs in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 
2020c). Due to fusion, the relative contributions of the basioccipital and exoccipital to the boundaries 
of the foramen magnum cannot be determined.
In lateral view, the occipital condyle is set on a short neck and the ventral margin of the basioc-
cipital curves anteroventrally (Figure 4A). Anterior to the occipital condyle, the ventral surface of the 
basioccipital is generally smooth but bears some irregular pits. The basioccipital expands laterally and 
especially ventrally to form prominent, rounded basal tubera, which are strongly offset ventrally with 
respect to the long axis of the occipital condyle (Figure 4A). This gives the posteroventral corner of the 
braincase a dorsoventrally deep, ‘stepped’ appearance in lateral view. By contrast, the basal tubera lie 
at the same level as, or slightly dorsal to, the occipital condyle in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; 
Norman, 2020c) and Emausaurus (Haubold, 1990). In ankylosaurs and stegosaurs, the basal tubera 
project only a short distance ventral to the occipital condyle (e.g., Gilmore, 1914; Maryanska, 1977; 
Sereno and Dong, 1992; Vickaryous and Russell, 2003) and it seems likely that the deep, ‘stepped’ 
basal tubera of Yuxisaurus are an autapomorphy. The basal tubera are widely separated in ventral view 
in Yuxisaurus, as also occurs in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c). However, the new 
taxon lacks the prominent midline ridge that lies between the basal tubera in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK 
PV R1111; Norman, 2020c). Dorsal to the basal tubera is a recess delineated by a sharp ridge anteri-
orly and another one posteriorly, which represents the otic region containing the fenestra ovalis and 
that is presumably formed by the otooccipital (Figure 4A) although bone boundaries in this region 
are impossible to assess due to fusion. Posterior to this recess, and bounded by the occipital condyle 
posteriorly, is another smaller recess, which is inferred to have contained the exits of cranial nerves 
IX–XI (the glossopharyngeal [IX], accessory [XI], and vagus nerves [X]). However, all of these inferred 
foramina are completely concealed by matrix and cannot be identified (Figure 4A).
The basisphenoid is preserved but is broken ventrally on its left- hand side. As in other thyreo-
phorans, it is anteroposteriorly short in comparison with the basioccipital. Its base forms a gently 
curved shelf, posterolateral to which the anteroposteriorly compressed basipterygoid processes are 
directed ventrolaterally in posterior view and slightly posteriorly in lateral view (Figures 4A and 5D). 
The basipterygoid processes are situated considerably lower than the basal tubera in both lateral and 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
14 of 37
posterior views, creating an additional ‘step’ in the posterior margin of the braincase (Figures 4A and 
5D). This differs from the conditions in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c), Emausaurus 
(Haubold, 1990), stegosaurs (e.g., Gilmore, 1914; Galton, 1988; Sereno and Dong, 1992), and 
ankylosaurs (e.g., Maryanska, 1977; Vickaryous and Russell, 2003), in which these processes only 
extend for a short distance ventrally with respect to the occipital condyle and are poorly exposed in 
posterior view, and this probably represents an additional autapomorphy of Yuxisaurus. Although the 
left basipterygoid process is missing, the processes appear to have been separated by an angle of 30° 
(Figure 5D), whereas this angle is closer to 60° in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c).
The basipterygoid and parasphenoid are fused indistinguishably and the cultriform process is 
lentiform in transverse cross- section. It protrudes anterodorsally for a short distance, but its anterior 
portion is broken (Figure 4A). As with other features of the basicranium, the cultriform process is 
ventrally offset with respect to the occipital condyle, contributing to the deep, stepped appearance 
of the braincase in lateral view (Figure 4A). In Lesothosaurus (NHMUK PV RU B17; Porro et al., 2015), 
Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c), and Huayangosaurus (Sereno and Dong, 1992), 
the cultriform process and occipital condyle are in approximately the same plane.
The junction between the basisphenoid and prootic cannot be determined, but the presence of 
the latter can be inferred from the position of a large, teardrop- shaped foramen on the lateral surface 
of the braincase, which is inferred to be the exit for cranial nerve V (trigeminal: Figure 4A). Similarly, 
at least a portion of the laterosphenoid is present anterior to this opening, although no sutures are 
visible in this region. The braincase is open anteriorly, revealing the endocranial cavity, which is verti-
cally expanded and has a rounded, smooth inner surface (Figure 5C). A bone fragment attached 
to the anterior border of the right laterosphenoid is identified as the right orbitosphenoid. Ossified 
orbitosphenoids are also present in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020c), ankylosaurs 
(Maryanska, 1977; Vickaryous and Russell, 2003), and stegosaurs (Gilmore, 1914).
Mandible
The post- dentary portions of both hemimandibles are preserved, including the angulars, surangulars, 
prearticulars, and articulars (Figure 7). Their lateral surfaces are smooth and bear no ornamentation 
or fused osteoderms.
In lateral view, the ventral margin of the angular is very slightly concave, but its posterior part 
curves posterodorsally at an angle of approximately 155°, as in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020c). The 
angular is tallest anteriorly but tapers posteriorly and has an almost straight dorsal margin that turns 
abruptly dorsally close to its posterior end (Figure 7A). The elongated, upturned posterior process of 
the angular is not present in either Emausaurus (Haubold, 1990) or Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; 
Norman, 2020c) and appears to be unique to Yuxisaurus among early branching thyreophorans; it 
is regarded as a potential autapomorphy herein. Viewed ventrally, the angular of Yuxisaurus has a 
tapering posterior terminus (Figure 7B), and the sinuous suture with the prearticular extends along 
the ventral margin, which can only be seen beneath the adductor fossa in medial view (Figure 7C and 
G). The smooth lateral surface bulges laterally at its center, which is more prominent on the right side, 
but the ventral surface is generally flat.
In lateral view, the surangular has subparallel dorsal and ventral margins. Both margins are hori-
zontal and straight posteriorly, but curve anterodorsally anteriorly (Figure 7A). Along the dorsal border 
immediately anterior to this inflexion is a dorsally extending process, with a sharp dorsal margin 
that also bulges slightly laterally. On the left surangular, the anterior portion of this process curves 
medially while the posterior portion is missing. By contrast, this process is oddly shaped on the right 
side, having a broad, subtriangular base with a transversely wide but anteroposteriorly compressed 
process that is posterodorsally directed (Figure 7E and H). Further anteriorly, the dorsal margin of 
the surangular expands transversely, to roof the adductor fossa medially, and laterally to overhang 
the lateral surface. In lateral view, this dorsal expansion extends anterodorsally, whereas it is generally 
horizontal in Emausaurus and Scelidosaurus (Haubold, 1990; Norman, 2020c). The surface ventral 
to the lateral overhang is broadly depressed, and its posterodorsal corner is pierced by a foramen 
(Figure 7E). This foramen is prominent on the right hemimandible but cannot be identified on the 
left side. Further anteriorly, the surangular dorsal margin forms a dorsal apex. Its medial margin is 
higher than its lateral margin in dorsal view, so that its dorsal surface is oriented laterally. This apex, 
presumably the highest point of the mandible, flattens anterolaterally and the dorsal surface anterior 
to this apex is generally flat. Immediately beneath this apex the lateral surface bulges strongly laterally 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
15 of 37
(Figure 7E). In medial view, the surangular encloses the ovoid adductor fossa dorsally and posteriorly 
(Figure 7G). The inner surface of the adductor fossa is smooth but it bears an irregular vertical ridge 
in the center of its ventral half (Figure 7G). As with the articular surface of the hemimandible, the 
surangular curves medially posteriorly and expands medially to form an elevated platform relative to 
the articular surface, and then shrinks abruptly, tapering posteromedially (Figure 7D and H). At the 
inflection point of this process the lateral surface bulges laterally, posterior to which the lateral surface 
bears an anterolaterally- posteromedially elongated depression that is prominent on both hemiman-
dibles (Figure 7A and E).
In medial view, the prearticular forms the ventral margin of the adductor fossa. Its dorsal margin is 
concave and sharp, but is interrupted by a rounded process that lies slightly posterior to the middle 
of the fossa, as also occurs in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020c). The prearticular presumably contrib-
uted to the posterior margin of the adductor fossa, but the extent of this cannot be recognized in this 
specimen. Adjacent to the posterior margin, the prearticular bears a dorsal concavity, which expands 
laterally to form a broad, flattened articular surface that meets the surangular laterally (Figure 7C and 
G). Sutures are difficult to determine in this region but it seems likely that the prearticular extended 
posteriorly to the end of the mandible and completely fused with the surangular ventrally.
The articular is completely fused with the surrounding bones so its original outline is unknown. 
Nevertheless, in dorsal view, the articular bears a concavity medially, which is broader on the right 
hemimandible than on the left (Figure 7D and H). Anterior to this concavity, the articular has a dorsal 
pyramidal process. Posteriorly the articulars have different shapes on different sides, as the right 
articular possesses a mediodorsal flange with a flat dorsal surface, while the left articular has a vertical 
flange and bears a deep fossa on the dorsal surface (Figure 7D and H).
A bone fragment in the anterodorsal corner of the adductor fossa of the right hemimandible might 
represent part of a coronoid, but further information is unavailable due to poor preservation.
Dentition
Most of the maxillary tooth crowns were abraded away accidentally during preparation (Figure 3E). 
The alveolar sockets are elliptical and slightly expanded transversely (Figure 3D). Most of the teeth 
are similar in size except for the 7th, 8th, 10th, and 11th teeth, which appear to be slightly larger 
on the basis of their cross- sections (approximately 5- mm labiolingually by 7- mm mesiodistally). The 
best- preserved tooth is the posterior- most one, which is embedded in its socket. This tooth crown is 
triangular in lingual view and has coarsely denticulate mesial and distal margins (Figure 3F). Its lingual 
surface is ornamented with multiple (at least four) pairs of vertical ridges lying in parallel to each 
another, which extend to the ventral margin of the crown and support the marginal denticles. These 
ridges are narrow but densely packed and are almost evenly distributed over the crown surface. The 
tooth differs from those of Lesothosaurus and Scutellosaurus, which lack ridges on the crown surface 
(Colbert, 1981; Sereno, 1991; Breeden et al., 2021), and those of Emausaurus and Scelidosaurus, 
which have only incipient fluting and ridges (Haubold, 1990; Norman, 2020c; NHMUK PV R1111). 
However, the teeth of many ankylosaurs (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003) and stegosaurs (Galton, 
2004) do bear numerous ridges, although Yuxisaurus lacks the prominent primary ridge that is often 
present in stegosaurs as well as the rounded denticles usually present in the latter clade.
Axial skeleton
An articulated series of the four anterior- most cervical vertebrae is present and well preserved 
(Figure 8). Originally, these vertebrae were articulated with the occiput, but they were separated 
during preparation. Five isolated dorsal vertebrae of varying preservation are also present (Figure 9). 
They were not articulated and their exact sequence cannot be confirmed due to the variation in verte-
bral morphology and proportions that occurs along the dorsal series of other thyreophoran dinosaurs. 
However, we attempt to place them in relative order herein.
Cervical vertebrae and ribs
The atlas is composed of a ventral intercentrum and a pair of dorsal neural arches (Figure 8A–D, F 
and G). In anterior view, the atlas is rotated clockwise through 30° with respect to the other preserved 
vertebrae (Figure 8F). It is much wider transversely than long anteroposteriorly . The intercentrum 
is crescentic to reniform in outline in anterior view and possesses an anterior articular surface that is 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
16 of 37
Figure 8. Articulated series of the anterior- most cervical vertebrae (atlas, axis, and cervicals 3 and 4) of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in (A) left lateral, (B) dorsal, 
(C) right lateral, (D) ventral, (E) posterior, and (F) anterior views. Atlas in (G) ventral view with interpretative diagram beneath. Abbreviations: ard, arrow- 
like depression; cvr, cervical rib; ns, neural spine; pap, parapophysis; poz, postzygapophysis; prz, prezygapophysis; ri, ridge; tp, transverse process. Scale 
bar equals 5 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
17 of 37
Figure 9. Dorsal vertebrae of Yuxisaurus kopchicki. D1 in (A) left lateral, (B) dorsal, (C) anterior, (D) posterior, and 
(E) ventral views. D2 in (F) left lateral, (G) dorsal, (H) anterior, (I) posterior, and (J) ventral views. D3 in (K) left lateral, 
(L) dorsal, (M) anterior, (N) posterior, and (O) ventral views. D4 in (P) left lateral, (Q) dorsal, (R) anterior, (S) posterior, 
and (T) ventral views. D5 in (U) left lateral, (V) dorsal, (W) anterior, (X) posterior, and (Y) ventral views. Abbreviations: 
Figure 9 continued on next page
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
18 of 37
broadly concave and faces anterodorsally (Figure 8F). A massive but short swelling is present on either 
side of the lateral surface that is directed ventrally and laterally, anterior to which is a low anterodorsally 
directed ridge (Figure 8F and G). This ridge is separated from the swelling by a distinct anterodor-
sally directed trough. Viewed ventrally, a pair of arrow- like depressions, which point posterolaterally, 
occupies the posterior- most surface of the intercentrum to form sharp posterior margins (Figure 8G). 
This feature appears to be unique to Yuxisaurus and is absent in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; 
Norman, 2020a) and Scutellosaurus (Breeden and Rowe, 2020; Breeden et al., 2021). In contrast to 
Yuxisaurus, the ventral surface of the atlantal intercentrum in Stegosaurus bears two posterolaterally 
directed ridges and a subtle midline ridge separating two cavities (Maidment et al., 2015). The left 
neural arch is incompletely preserved but resembles closely the right one where preserved. The right 
pedicle is cylindrical, with an expanded ventral base articulating with the intercentrum. The postzyga-
pophysis is a thin plate, extending posterodorsally, as in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 
2020a) and Gastonia (Kinneer et al., 2016), but its lateral margin bulges and thickens. A small plate 
above the neural arch probably represents the proatlas.
The axial centrum is massive and approximately equally long and wide (Figure 8A, C and D). 
Viewed laterally both its anterior and posterior articular surfaces are inclined anteriorly, giving it 
a trapezoidal outline (Figure 8A and C). Its anterior articular surface is strongly concave but the 
posterior surface appears to be flatter. The anteroventrally placed triangular parapophysis is prom-
inent, expanding laterally, posterior to which a distinct depression extends over the lateral surface 
(Figure  8A). The ventral surface of the centrum is smooth, with a rounded ridge in the center 
that is flanked by oblique surfaces laterally (Figure 8D), similar to the condition in Scutellosaurus 
(Breeden et al., 2021). By contrast, the axial centra of Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 
2020a), Stegosaurus (NHMUK PV R36730; Maidment et al., 2015), and Gargoyleosaurus, all bear 
a midline keel. In lateral view, the left diapophysis is directed ventrally (Figure 8A), but its tip is 
separated from the parapophysis by an anterodorsally extending trough. The right diapophysis is 
concealed by a cervical rib and surrounding matrix. In other thyreophorans, such as Scelidosaurus 
(NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020a), Stegosaurus (NHMUK PV R36730; Maidment et al., 2015), 
and Sauropelta (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003), the diapophysis is directed ventrally but also 
slightly laterally and can be seen in ventral view. Both of the prezygapophyses curve laterally and 
ventrally and bear slightly convex articular facets (Figure 8A and B). Due to rotation of the atlas 
(see above), the right prezygapophysis of the axis does not articulate with the corresponding 
atlantal postzygapophysis. The postzygapophysis expands and diverges laterally to a greater 
degree than the prezygapophysis in dorsal view (Figure 8B). Its articular facet faces ventrally and 
is slightly concave as in the ankylosaur Sauropelta (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003), but differs 
from Scelidosaurus in which the articular facet faces ventrolaterally (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 
2020a). A flat lamina above the diapophysis connects the base of the prezygapophysis anteriorly 
and the postzygapophysis posteriorly. The thick neural spine extends anteroposteriorly with a 
mild anterior transverse expansion but flares posteriorly where the postzygapophysis meets the 
spine on either side. In Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020a), the anterior transverse 
expansion is much more prominent than in Yuxisaurus, whereas in the ankylosaur Sauropelta (Vick-
aryous and Russell, 2003) and the stegosaur Stegosaurus (NHMUK PV R36730; Maidment et al., 
2015), this expansion appears to be mild. In lateral view, the dorsal margin of the axial neural spine 
is sinusoidal with a central apex, an anterior portion that slopes ventrally and that is nearly straight, 
and a posterior portion that is slightly concave (Figure 8A and C), similar to that of Sauropelta 
(Vickaryous and Russell, 2003) and Stegosaurus (NHMUK PV R36730; Maidment et al., 2015). 
In contrast, the dorsal margin of the axial neural spine is convex in Lesothosaurus (NHMUK PV 
R11004; Baron et al., 2017b) and straight in Scelidosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020a) 
and Scutellosaurus (Breeden et al., 2021). Both the anterior and posterior ends of the neural spine 
overhang the articular surfaces slightly in lateral view, as seen also in Lesothosaurus (NHMUK PV 
R11004; Baron et al., 2017b) and some ankylosaurs (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003). By contrast, 
in Scelidosaurus the posterior end of the neural spine extends much farther than the posterior 
f, fossa; k, keel; nc, neural canal; pap, parapophysis; prz, prezygapophysis; tp, transverse process. Scale bar equals 
5 cm.
Figure 9 continued
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
19 of 37
articular surface (NHMUK PV R1111; Norman, 2020a). Posteriorly, a deep, oval postspinal fossa is 
present, as also occurs in Scelidosaurus and Stegosaurus (NHMUK PV R1111, NHMUK PV R36730; 
Maidment et al., 2015; Norman, 2020a).
The third cervical vertebra is similar in size to the axis. The centrum is spool- shaped and constricted 
in the middle (Figure 8D). Its ventral surface possesses a rounded ridge that extends anteroposte-
riorly, contrasting with the presence of a keel in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a) and Scutellosaurus 
(Breeden and Rowe, 2020; Breeden et al., 2021). In lateral view, the centrum is relatively short and 
subquadrate in outline (Figure 8A and C), with a length to posterior height ratio of approximately 
1.4, similar to the condition in some ankylosaurs (Maleev, 1956; Kilbourne and Carpenter, 2005), but 
contrasting with the more elongate cervicals present in Scelidosaurus (~1.7; Norman, 2020a), Scute-
llosaurus (~2.1; Breeden and Rowe, 2020), and some stegosaurs (NHMUK PV R36730; Maidment 
et al., 2015). The parapophysis is not as prominent as that on the axis, and is a rounded process occu-
pying the anterior corner of the lateral surface, posterior to which the lateral surface of the centrum is 
depressed. The right diapophysis curves ventrolaterally and its distal end is crescentic with a flat dorsal 
surface and a convex ventral margin, as in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a). The prezygapophyses 
extend anterodorsally beyond the centrum anterior margin. The postzygapophyses project postero-
dorsally and somewhat laterally, terminating flush with the posterior margin of the centrum, and their 
articular facets face ventrolaterally. The dorsal surface of the postzygapophysis bears a rugose ridge 
that expands transversely as it extends posteriorly, as also occurs in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a). 
The neural spine is damaged, but it appears to have expanded strongly posteriorly to overhang the 
posterior margin of the centrum (Figure  8A–C). This feature is absent in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 
2020a), in which the neural spine terminates more anteriorly, but is present in some cervicals of Scute-
llosaurus (Breeden and Rowe, 2020). A postspinal fossa is present but is smaller than that of the axis.
The fourth cervical centrum is similar to that of the preceding vertebra, both in overall morphology 
and proportions (Figure 8A–D). The lateral surface posterior to the parapophysis bears the shallowest 
excavation of the four preserved cervicals. The posterior articular surface has a crescentic outline, with 
a flat upper margin and ventral convex margin, and its center is occupied by a semilunate concavity 
(Figure  8E). The parapophysis is cylindrical in outline, differing from those of the axis and third 
cervical, which have subtriangular and rounded outlines, respectively. The transverse process extends 
ventrolaterally and has an elliptical cross- section (Figure 8A–D). The prezygapophysis projects antero-
dorsally to a point almost halfway along the preceding cervical centrum (Figure 8A), contrasting with 
the shorter processes present in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a), Scutellosaurus (Breeden and Rowe, 
2020; Breeden et al., 2021), and Stegosaurus (Maidment et al., 2015), but it is unclear if this has 
been altered taphonomically. A postspinal fossa is present, but is the smallest found in the preserved 
cervicals. The large neural canal is rounded in outline (Figure 8E).
A cervical rib articulates with the parapophysis of the right axis and, partly, with the posterior 
surface of the atlas via its expanded single head. Its elongate shaft extends posterodorsally at an 
angle of 32° from the horizontal with a gentle curvature (Figure 8C), almost reaching the middle of the 
third cervical with a total length of about 75 mm. By contrast, the axial ribs of Scelidosaurus are rela-
tively shorter (Norman, 2020a), but they are unknown in other early thyreophoran taxa. In Yuxisaurus, 
the rib shaft is transversely compressed and tapers distally, but that of Scelidosaurus is more rod- like 
(Norman, 2020a) but this difference could reflect taphonomic compression. The lateral surface of 
the rib shaft is generally flat, but is slightly depressed anteriorly, and is separated from the head by a 
shallow break- in- slope in lateral view. By contrast, the axial rib of Scelidosaurus bears a lateral ridge 
along the shaft (Norman, 2020a). Another 26- mm- long rib fragment is attached to the lateroventral 
surface of the axis.
Dorsal vertebrae
Five isolated dorsal vertebrae of varying preservation are present (Figure 9) and are labeled as D1–
D5 for convenience. They are generally similar to those of a range of thyreophoran taxa, including 
Scelidosaurus and ankylosaurs (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003; Norman, 2020a), although they lack 
the extreme neural arch elongation of stegosaurs (Galton, 2004).
‘D1’ preserves the centrum and the bases of the neural arch pedicles only (Figure 9A–E). Its ante-
rior articular surface is concave (Figure 9C) while the posterior articular surface is flat but possesses a 
rounded fossa in the center (Figure 9D). Both articular surfaces are subcircular in outline. The centrum 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
20 of 37
has a subquadrate outline in lateral view (Figure 9A), is spool- shaped in ventral view, and lacks a 
ventral keel (Figure 9E).
The centrum of ‘D2’ is spool- shaped with a ventral margin that is gently arched in lateral view 
(Figure 9F–J). The ventral surface is rounded and lacks a keel (Figure 9J). Both articular surfaces are 
subcircular in outline but with a slightly flattened dorsal margin (Figure 9H1). The anterior articular 
surface appears to be more dorsoventrally compressed than the posterior one. The anterior articular 
surface is concave, while the posterior surface is nearly flat with its center occupied by a distinct 
concavity. A partial neural arch is present. The parapophysis is positioned level with the dorsal part 
of the neural canal and is an expanded oval facet that is situated close to the anterior rim of the 
centrum in lateral view (Figure 9F). Its diapophysis is stout and projects laterodorsally at an angle 
of ~33° above the horizontal. Its dorsal surface is generally flat with a gentle swelling in the middle. 
Although broken, the neural spine appears to have been low, with a transverse expansion anteriorly, 
and is nearly level with the diapophysis in height in lateral view (Figure 9F). The neural canal is ovoid in 
outline and dorsoventrally elongated (Figure 9H1). All of the zygapophyses are missing, but a broad 
infrapostzygapophyseal fossa is present (Figure 9F).
‘D3’ has an amphicoelous, spool- shaped centrum (Figure 9K–O). In lateral view its ventral margin is 
more arched than that of ‘D2’ (Figure 9K), and its ventral surface is constricted into a keel (Figure 9O). 
The left lateral surface bears an anteroposteriorly elongated depression on its dorsal part, but this 
is absent on the right- hand side. A partial neural arch is present. The remaining portion of the left 
diapophysis is horizontally inclined and has a flat dorsal surface. The neural spine is thickened medio-
laterally, with a transverse width of 16 mm in the middle, which is significantly greater than that of ‘D2’ 
(4 mm). The thickened neural spine and horizontal transverse process suggest that this is most likely a 
posterior dorsal vertebra (Norman, 2020a). The prezygapophysis curves anterodorsally from the base 
of the neural spine, overhanging the anterior margin of the centrum (Figure 9K). Its articular facet was 
probably directed dorsally but is concealed by an adhered fragment of the preceding postzygapoph-
ysis. In anterior view, the infraprezygapophyseal surface is broadly concave (Figure 9M). The postzy-
gapophyseal fragment of the preceding vertebra is massive, extending across the vertebral midline, 
suggesting that the postzygapophysis fused with its counterpart in the posterior dorsal series.
‘D4’ consists of a centrum and partial neural arch lacking processes (Figure 9P–T). The centrum 
is slightly longer than that of ‘D3’ , but its morphology is generally similar, including the presence of 
a ventral keel (Figure 9T). Its right lateral surface bears a shallow, elongate depression, but this is 
absent on the left. The remnant of the left parapophysis indicates that it was positioned high on the 
neural arch, immediately above the neural canal. Viewed anteriorly both of the neural arch pedicles 
are stout and have lateral margins that curve dorsally and then laterally as also occurs in ‘D2’ and ‘D3’ 
(Figure 9R).
‘D5’ consists only of the centrum and the broken bases of the neural arch pedicles (Figure 9U–Y). 
It is generally similar to the other dorsal vertebrae and is of equal length to ‘D4,’ although its concave 
lateral surfaces are smooth and lack depressions. The ventral margin of the centrum is only slightly 
concave in lateral view, and in ventral view, the keel is less prominent than that of ‘D4’ (Figure 9Y). The 
presence of ventral keels in posterior dorsal vertebrae contrasts with their absence in Scelidosaurus 
(Norman, 2020a) and Stegosaurus (Maidment et al., 2015), although some ankylosaurs have keeled 
posterior dorsal centra (Kirkland and Carpenter, 1994; Kirkland et al., 2013).
Appendicular skeleton
The specimen includes limited appendicular elements, including: the proximal part of a left scapula 
and the distal part of the right scapula (Figure 10); a complete right humerus (Figure 11); and the 
distal part of the left femur (Figure 12).
Scapula
The scapula is represented by a right scapula blade (Figure  10A–D) and a left proximal plate 
(Figure 10E–H), but unfortunately, these two pieces do not overlap in morphology so the overall 
shape and size of the scapula remain unclear. However, on the basis of the preserved parts, we esti-
mate that a complete scapula would have been at least 475 mm long.
The left proximal plate of the scapula is poorly preserved with broken margins (Figure 10E–H). 
As preserved, it has a maximum width of ~188 mm. It is expanded dorsoventrally with respect to the 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
21 of 37
scapula shaft and its lateral surface is shallowly convex. Anteriorly, a portion of the glenoid fossa is 
present, which is anteroposteriorly concave. An anteroposteriorly elongated depression occupies the 
ventral surface immediately posterior to the glenoid on the medial surface of the proximal end, as 
also occurs in Gastonia (Kinneer et al., 2016). The medial surface of the proximal scapula is strongly 
convex (Figure 10F). Few other details are available due to damage.
The scapula blade is relatively thick transversely, with a convex lateral surface and a flat or slightly 
depressed medial surface. In lateral view, its distal end is expanded dorsoventrally, with a maximum 
distal width of ~138 mm and a mid- shaft width of ~83 mm (Figure 10A–D). The dorsal and ventral 
margins of the scapula blade are subparallel along most of its length in lateral view, but the dorsal 
margin diverges slightly to contribute to the distal expansion, while the ventral margin curves ventrally 
at its distal end, so that the distal expansion is slightly asymmetrical with respect to the scapula long- 
axis. The distal margin is gently convex. This produces a scapula blade outline similar to those of 
Scutellosaurus (Breeden and Rowe, 2020), Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a), and some stegosaurs 
(Galton, 2004), while in most ankylosaurs, such as Gargoyleosaurus, Sauropelta, and Gastonia, the 
dorsal scapular margin almost parallels, the ventral margin and curves posteroventrally (Godefroit 
et al., 1999; Vickaryous and Russell, 2003; Kinneer et al., 2016), and in Stegosaurus these margins 
are essentially subparallel along their entire lengths (Maidment et al., 2015). Close to the distal end, 
the lateral surface bears a broad depression, but it is not clear if this is an original feature or due to 
Figure 10. Scapulae of Yuxisaurus kopchicki. Distal part of right scapula in (A) lateral, (B) medial, (C) ventral, and (D) dorsal views. Proximal part of left 
scapula in (E) lateral, (F) medial, (G) ventral, and (H) dorsal views. Abbreviation: d, depression. Scale bar equals 10 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
22 of 37
taphonomic damage as there is some cracking in the area (Figure 10A). In dorsal or ventral views, the 
scapula blade is bowed, with the distal end inclined medially (Figure 10C and D).
Humerus
The right humerus is well preserved, except for a small section of the distal end (Figure 11). It has an 
elongate, slender shaft, with a diameter of ~50 mm, which separates the proximal and distal expan-
sions, which reach maximum widths of ~160 mm and 120 mm, respectively (Figure 11A and C). Both 
of these expansions are relatively broader than in either Scutellosaurus (Colbert, 1981; Breeden 
and Rowe, 2020; Breeden et al., 2021) or Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a), giving the humerus of 
Yuxisaurus a stockier appearance that is much more similar to those of ankylosaurs and stegosaurs 
(Vickaryous and Russell, 2003; Galton, 2004).
In anterior view, the humerus is straight, with the shaft lacking any significant deflection, and has a 
total length of ~345 mm (Figure 11A). A robust deltopectoral crest arises from the lateral margin of 
the proximal expansion and curves anteriorly and slightly medially, terminating in a thickened, trans-
versely expanded distal end (35 mm in thickness). The deltopectoral crest extends to a point ~46% of 
the humeral length (Figure 11A). This is similar to the conditions present in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 
2020a) and some ankylosaurs (e.g., Pawpawsaurus, Europelta: Lee, 1996; Kirkland et al., 2013), but 
differs from those of other ankylosaurs (e.g., Pinacosaurus, Saichania), where this crest terminates 
more distally (Maryanska, 1977; Godefroit et al., 1999), and Scutellosaurus, where it ends more 
Figure 11. Right humerus of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in (A) anterior, (B) lateral, (C) posterior, (D) medial, (E) proximal, and (F) distal views. Abbreviations: 
dpc, deltopectoral crest; f, fossa; h, humeral head; it, internal tuberosity; rc, radial condyle; tb, tubercle; uc, ulnar condyle. Scale bar equals 10 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
23 of 37
proximally (Breeden et al., 2021). The proximal anterior surface is strongly concave. In anterior view, 
the internal tuberosity has a straight, steeply inclined dorsomedial margin, which meets its curved 
ventromedial margin at an angle of ~110°. In proximal view, the internal tuberosity is anteroposteriorly 
expanded and is separated from the humeral head by a distinct notch dorsally (Figure 11E). This notch 
is absent in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a) and Scutellosaurus (Breeden and Rowe, 2020; Breeden 
et al., 2021), but is present in some ankylosaurians (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003). The humeral 
head is subspherical, protrudes posteriorly and somewhat anteriorly with respect to the rest of the 
proximal end, and its posterior end curves posterolaterally, forming a triangular process (Figure 11E). 
This process partially encloses a posterolateral concavity, which is present in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 
2020a) and Europelta (Kirkland et al., 2013) but not Stegosaurus (Maidment et al., 2015) or Scutel-
losaurus (Breeden et al., 2021). In posterior view, the proximal surface is convex, and a broad swelling 
arises from the base of the humeral head that extends ventrally for a short distance (Figure 11C). On 
the posterior surface of the deltopectoral crest, there is a large triceps tubercle, which is obliquely 
oriented and has a sharp, pointed apex (Figure 11B). This tubercle is present in various ankylosaurs, 
such as Gastonia and Gargoyleosaurus, and is supposedly homologous with a pocket- like muscle scar 
Figure 12. Distal end of right femur of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in (A) posterior, (B) ventral, (C) lateral, (D) medial, and (E) dorsal views. Abbreviations: d, 
depression; icg, intercondylar groove; lc, lateral condyle; mc, medial condyle; nc, notch. Scale bar equals 10 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
24 of 37
present in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a), but is absent in Lesothosaurus (Baron et al., 2017b) and 
Scutellosaurus (Colbert, 1981; Breeden et al., 2021).
The shaft has a subtriangular cross- section in its mid- part, with a flat anterior surface and convex 
posterior surface. Distally, the medial (ulnar) condyle extends further ventrally than the lateral condyle 
and also exhibits greater anteroposterior expansion. A broad, shallow, ‘U’-shaped fossa is positioned 
immediately dorsal to the distal condyles on the anterior surface (Figure 11A), which differs from 
the longer, narrower, ‘V’-shaped and shallower fossa seen in other early thyreophorans (Breeden 
and Rowe, 2020; Norman, 2020a; Breeden et al., 2021) and stegosaurs (Maidment et al., 2015), 
although a similar fossa occurs in some ankylosaurs (Vickaryous and Russell, 2003). A narrow, vertical 
depression separates the two condyles on the posterior surface (Figure 11C). In ventral view, the distal 
end has a dumbbell- shaped outline, though the ulnar condyle is more strongly expanded anteropos-
teriorly than the radial condyle (Figure 11F).
Femur
The distal end of the left femur is preserved (Figure 12). It reaches a maximum transverse width 
of ~151 mm and is ~110 mm in anteroposterior length. The distal end is mediolaterally and antero-
posteriorly expanded with respect to the preserved part of the femoral shaft (Figure 12A). The shaft 
has a subrectangular cross- section (Figure 12E). The anterior surface of the distal femur is generally 
flat, but its medial part is damaged. The distal end is divided into two articular condyles (Figure 12B). 
In posterior view, the lateral condyle is ovoid, dorsoventrally compressed, and curves slightly postero-
ventrally from its base, while the medial condyle is broad, triangular, and protrudes slightly postero-
dorsally (Figure 12A). In ventral view, the condyles are separated by a broad, deep, and ‘U’-shaped 
intercondylar groove (Figure 12B), that is confluent dorsally with a deep narrow sulcus that extends 
for a short distance on the posterior surface (Figure 12A). In ventral view, the lateral and medial 
condyles extend for approximately the same distance anteriorly and enclose a shallow anterior trough 
(Figure 12B). The lateral condyle has a mediolaterally narrow, subrectangular outline in distal view, 
and is inset from the lateral margin so that it is separated from it by a distinct notch (Figure 12B and 
Figure 13. Cervical and pectoral osteoderms of Yuxisaurus kopchicki. Tripartite compound osteoderm (TPO) 1 in (A) anterior, (B) dorsal, and 
(C) posterior views. TPO 2 in (D) anterior, (E) dorsal, and (F) posterior views. Bipartite osteoderm (BPO) 1 in (G) anterior, (H) dorsal, and (I) medial views; 
BPO 2 in (J) anterior, (K) dorsal, and (L) posterior views; BPO 3 in (M) anterior, (N) dorsal, and (O) posterior views; BPO 4 in (P) anterior, (Q) posterior, 
and (R) dorsal views; and BPO 5 in (S) anterior, (T) posterior, and (U) dorsal views. Blade- like cervical spines in anterior and posterior views (V, 
W). Abbreviations: ls, lateral spine; mds, middle scute; ms, medial scute. Scale bar equals 10 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
25 of 37
C). The lateral condyle also projects slightly further posteriorly than the mediolaterally wider, rounded 
medial condyle. The border of the medial condyle is invaginated to form a broad, ‘U’-shaped trough 
(Figure 12B), that is confluent with a shallow depression on the medial surface of the distal femur 
(Figure  12D). This trough/depression is absent in Scelidosaurus (Norman, 2020a), Scutellosaurus 
(Colbert, 1981; Breeden et al., 2021), ankylosaurs (e.g., Kilbourne and Carpenter, 2005; Kirkland 
et al., 2013; Kinneer et al., 2016), and stegosaurs (Gilmore, 1914), and is considered a potential 
autapomorphy of Yuxisaurus. A roughened swelling on the lateral surface just dorsal to the notch 
bounding the lateral condyle might represent the attachment of the M. gastrocnemius.
Osteoderms
More than 120 osteoderms of Y. kopchicki were recovered (Figure 13, Figure 14, Figure 15). However, 
all of these were found disassociated, without direct evidence of their original life positions. Neverthe-
less, co- ossified osteoderms are usually present in the cervical or pectoral regions of thyreophorans 
whereas single osteoderms are distributed on other body parts (e.g., Blows, 2001; Vickaryous and 
Russell, 2003), allowing some tentative conclusions on their positions to be made.
Cervical and pectoral osteoderms
Seven compound osteoderms are preserved. Two of these consist of three elements (tripartite osteo-
derms) and the remaining five consist of two elements (bipartite osteoderms) (Figure 13). In all of these 
Figure 14. Six selected individual osteoderms of Yuxisaurus kopchicki. Osteoderm 1 in (A) dorsal, (B) ventral, (C) posterior, and (D) anterior views; 
osteoderm 2 in (E) dorsal, (F) ventral, and (G) lateral views; osteoderm 3 in (H) dorsal, (I) ventral, and (J) lateral views; osteoderm 4 in (K) dorsal, 
(L) ventral, and (N) lateral views; osteoderm 5 in (N) dorsal, (O) anterior, and (P) lateral views; osteoderm 6 in (Q) dorsal, (R) ventral, and (S) lateral views. 
Scale bar equals 5 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
26 of 37
compound structures, the individual osteoderms are fused indistinguishably and it is likely that other 
co- ossified osteoderms were originally attached to some of these structures but were not preserved.
The two tripartite osteoderms (referred to hereafter as TPO 1 and 2) are similar in size and shape 
and mirror each other anatomically (Figure 13A–F). Each is composed of a blade- like lateral spine, a 
stouter, intermediate spine, and a conical medial osteoderm. In TPO 1 (Figure 13A–C), which is inter-
preted as from the right- hand side of the body, the base of the lateral spine is anteroposteriorly wide 
(128 mm) but thins dorsoventrally (45 mm). This spine extends laterally and its anterior and posterior 
margins are sharp. The straight anterior margin is inclined posteriorly while its posterior margin is 
slightly convex. Although the apex is missing, it seems reasonable to assume that the two edges 
converged to a point apically. Its lateral surface is swollen laterally in its central part. Four parallel 
ridges and the grooves between them extend on to the lateral surface from the base: however, these 
features are absent in TPO 2, which suggests that they might be due to accidental over- preparation. 
The intermediate spine of TPO 1 is directed dorsoventrally. It has a suboval base, which is anteropos-
teriorly elongated (108 mm) but transversely narrow (78 mm), and that is tall dorsoventrally (107 mm). 
In TPO 1, the anterior margin of the intermediate spine is long and convex, but in TPO 2 (inferred to 
be from the right- hand side; Figure 13D–F), this margin is divided into two straight edges. In both 
specimens, the posterior margins of these spines are deflected, and are consistently shorter than the 
anterior margins: as a result, the dorsal apex is posteriorly displaced relative to the base. Their lateral 
surfaces are concave and smooth, lacking foramina or grooves, and bear a central swelling, which is 
vertically directed, on either side. In both TPO 1 and 2, the medial- most osteoderm is the smallest of 
the three (Figure 13A, C, D and F). It is similar to the others, and in TPO 1 has an anteroposteriorly 
elongated (62 mm) but transversely narrow (40 mm) base. Nevertheless, the spine is more conical 
in shape with a smooth rounded lateral surface. It has a posteriorly displaced dorsal apex, which is 
almost flush with the posterior margin of the base. Its dorsal end bears a small protrusion.
In anterior or posterior views, the conjoined ventral surface of each tripartite structure is arched 
(Figure 13A, C, D and F), presumably corresponding to the neck shape of Yuxisaurus. Co- ossified 
cervical half- rings are present only in Scelidosaurus and ankylosaurians among Thyreophora (e.g., 
Carpenter, 2001; Norman, 2021), and vary in terms of the number of osteoderms included and their 
individual morphology (e.g., Blows, 2001). The partial cervical half- rings of Yuxisaurus are not fused to 
any other half- rings and closely resemble the third cervical half- ring of Scelidosaurus, as well as those 
of Gargoyleosaurus, Sauropelta, Silvisaurus, Gastonia, Stegopelta, and Ankylosaurus (Carpenter, 
1984; Ford, 2000; Kinneer et  al., 2016; Norman, 2020b). The external surfaces of the cervical 
osteoderms are generally smooth, similar to those of the ankylosaurians Gastonia and Silvisaurus 
(Eaton, 1960; Kinneer et al., 2016), whereas they are pitted or vascularized in the early branching 
thyreophorans Scutellosaurus and Scelidosaurus, and in most ankylosaurians, such as Mymoorapelta, 
Edmontonia, Europelta, Saichania, and Pinacosaurus (Maryanska, 1977; Kirkland and Carpenter, 
1994; Kirkland et al., 2013; Burns and Currie, 2014; Breeden and Rowe, 2020; Norman, 2020b; 
Breeden et al., 2021).
Figure 15. ‘Pup tent’-shaped osteoderm of Yuxisaurus kopchicki in (A) posterior, (B) anterior, (C) ventral, (D) dorsal, 
and (E, F) side views. Scale bar equals 10 cm.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
27 of 37
The first bipartite osteoderm (termed ‘BPO 1’ hereafter) is composed of two spines (Figure 13G–I). 
These are similar in morphology, with an elongated oval base, a blade- like body and a convex dorsal 
end (Figure 13G). BPO 1 is inferred to be from the left side of the body when the spine apices are 
posteriorly placed relative to their base. The lateral spine curves dorsolaterally with a concave medial 
surface and convex lateral surface; the medial spine is straight with the lateral and medial surfaces 
nearly symmetrical to each other. The spine margins are somewhat convex, except that the posterior 
edge of the medial spine is straight. In posterior view, the lateral spine diverges from the medial spine 
at an angle of 45°. In dorsal view (Figure 13H), the lateral spine is more posteriorly placed than the 
medial spine, and the junction slightly narrows anteroposteriorly, leaving a broad concavity anteriorly 
and a narrow one posteriorly. Consequently, the lateral spine appears to contact the posterolateral 
portion of the medial spine. The ventral surface of the medial spine bears a curved ventromedial 
expansion, rendering its ventral surface concave. This expansion also extends anteriorly for a short 
distance.
The second bipartite osteoderm, BPO 2, has a similar configuration but is from the right- hand side 
of the body (Figure 13J–L). Compared to BPO 1, the medial spine is more robust (Figure 13J). This 
spine has a wide base and its distal end curves somewhat medially. The lateral spine diverges from the 
medial spine at an angle of 70° when the medial spine is vertically positioned. The surfaces of BPO 2 
are not as smooth as those of BPO 1: grooves are present on the lateral surface of the lateral spine; 
the medial spine is medially pitted at the base; and the conjoined ventral surface is ornamented with 
striations. The junction between the individual osteoderms has suffered severe damage, leaving a 
large fissure.
A pair of symmetrical bipartite osteoderms, BPO 3 (Figure 13M–O) and BPO 4 (Figure 13P–R), 
are similar in size and appearance. Each is composed of two spines of distinct sizes. In both speci-
mens, the larger spine is oval- based, has a nearly flat medial surface and a dorsoventrally concave 
but anteroposteriorly convex lateral surface. Both its anterior and posterior edges are curved and 
converge dorsally into a pointed apex. By contrast, the smaller spine has straight anterior and concave 
posterior margins that are both sharp, which terminate dorsally in a rounded apex. Its lateral surface 
is flat and the medial surface is convex. In dorsal view, the junction between the two osteoderms has 
a broad anterior concavity but an obtuse angle posteriorly, and unlike the condition in BPO 1, the 
lateral spine contacts the anterolateral corner of the medial spine. The co- ossified ventral surface is 
smooth and concave.
The fifth bipartite osteoderm (BPO 5) consists of a spine and a plate (Figure 13S- U). The spine 
has a long sharp edge, which extends obliquely and dorsally from the base, opposite to which is a 
short, blunt, vertical margin. Its lateral surfaces are strongly convex. The plate is generally flat dorsally, 
but half of it curves ventrally to meet, and project slightly beyond, the ventral margin of the spine. A 
gradual widening trough, which parallels part of the lateral surface, crosses the plate’s dorsal surface 
and extends ventrally next to the spine along the curved half surface. The plate contacts the spine at 
the front of the short edge. The conjoined ventral surface is severely damaged.
To our knowledge, asymmetrical co- ossified bipartite osteoderms are present in the cervical armor 
of Scelidosaurus, Hungarosaurus, and Struthiosaurus (Bunzel, 1871; Seeley, 1881; Pereda- Suberbiola 
and Galton, 2001; Ősi, 2005; Ősi et al., 2019; Norman, 2020b), the lateral pectoral armor of Edmon-
tonia and in a possible Early Jurassic ankylosaur from India (Ford, 2000; Galton, 2019). Therefore, 
these bipartite osteoderms were most likely from the cervical or pectoral region.
It seems likely that two isolated blade- like spines are also from the cervical region. These spines 
have an elongated oval base, so that the body and base are both narrow (Figure 13V and W). They 
both have a long convex edge and a short concave edge, so that the dorsal apex projects beyond 
the level of the base. The ventral half of the convex edge is nearly straight, then curves posterodor-
sally and continues dorsally with a mild curvature. The dorsal end is sharp on one spine but rounded 
on the other slightly larger one. Each spine has a depressed medial surface and a slightly convex 
lateral surface, although the larger spine (Figure  13V) bears a vertical depression on the convex 
surface close to its longest margin. The ventral surface is depressed but also bears an anteroventral 
expansion as in BPO 1 and BPO 2. These two spines are similar in appearance to the cervical spines 
of Polacanthus and the caudal plates of Mymoorapelta (Kirkland and Carpenter, 1994; Blows and 
Honeysett, 2014). However, the caudal plates are hollowed ventrally in Mymoorapelta; consequently, 
these spines are most likely from the cervical region of Yuxisaurus.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
28 of 37
Other osteoderms
Most other individual osteoderms are similar (Figure 14). They are oval- based, with a convex or slightly 
concave longest margin and a vertical or slightly concave short margin. These margins converge dorsally 
into an apex. Therefore, the body appears to be curved in osteoderms with a concave short margin, 
but straight in those with a vertical short margin. The longest margin is generally sharp whereas the 
shorter margin is rounded in some cases, although occasionally both margins are rounded. Ventrally 
they are generally flat but sometimes convex, with the ventral margins somewhat everted. The lateral 
surfaces are depressed, but generally bear a vertical swelling in their centers. It is noteworthy that 15 
of the 120 osteoderms have a foramen or are excavated ventrally. Where present the foramina have 
rounded outlines and are usually small relative to the ventral surface area, but they appear to open 
out and expand into cavities within the osteoderm. By contrast, the ventral excavations are fully open, 
creating an osteoderm inner surface. Generally, the osteoderms with a solid ventral surface are smaller 
in size than those with a hollow base. The largest hollow- based osteoderm is damaged but was at 
least 160- mm long, 150- mm wide, and 110- mm tall (Figure 14A–D). With reference to Scelidosaurus, 
the relatively large hollow- based osteoderms probably formed the primary rows across the dorsolat-
eral body surface or the caudal region, while other smaller osteoderms would have been interspersed 
among them (Norman, 2020b).
A unique ‘pup tent’-shaped osteoderm is approximately 126- mm long and 94- mm tall but 
lacks anterior and posterior walls (Figure  15). It is triangular in cross- section and strongly exca-
vated ventrally with a dorsal acute angle on one surface but rounded on the other side. Although 
weathered, the two buttresses are generally straight and divergent at an angle of ~48°. The outline 
between the buttresses resembles the overline outline of the osteoderm in both anterior and poste-
rior views, and the external and inner surfaces are smooth and slightly depressed (Figure 15). In 
dorsal view, the roof is somewhat curved and the rounded end transversely expands more than the 
acute side. Viewed laterally, the dorsal roof is nearly straight, overhanging the ventral end on both 
sides. This osteoderm appears to be similar to an anterior median caudal scute referred to Scelido-
saurus from Arizona, USA (Padian, 1989), and we propose that, in life, it was probably situated on 
the midline of the posterior part of the body of Yuxisaurus. Alternatively, this unusual morphology 
might represent a pathology.
Figure 16. Phylogenetic relationships of Yuxisaurus within Thyreophora. (A) Strict consensus of the six most parsimonious trees (MPTs) recovered from 
analysis of the modified Norman, 2021 data set. (B) Strict consensus of the two MPTs recovered from analysis of the modified Maidment et al., 2020 
data set. Bremer support values are shown adjacent to the nodes.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
29 of 37
Discussion
Phylogenetic results
Analysis of the Norman, 2021 data set resulted in the recovery of the six most parsimonious trees 
(MPTs) with tree lengths of 238 steps, a Consistency Index of 0.710 and a Retention Index of 0.858. 
A strict consensus of these trees is shown in Figure 16A. This analysis recovered Scutellosaurus as 
the earliest diverging member of a clade that also includes Emausaurus, Yuxisaurus, Scelidosaurus, 
and ankylosaurs; and this clade is the sister group of stegosaurs. Y. kopchicki is found in a clade with 
Emausaurus from the Toarcian of Germany, but support for this clade is weak (Bremer value of 1). This 
unnamed clade is in turn the sister- group of Scelidosaurus + Ankylosauria.
Inclusion of Yuxisaurus within the (Scutellosaurus (Emausaurus+ Yuxisaurus) (Scelidosaurus + Anky-
losauria)) clade is supported by the possession of the following unambiguous synapomorphies: 13 (1), 
cranial exostoses (cortical bone ornamentation) present; 17 (1), remodeling of the external surface of 
skull bones partial; 105 (1), osteoderms form parasagittal rows either side of dorsal midline; 108 (1), 
lateral flank osteoderms ovoid and keeled; and 117 (1), cervical osteoderms present. The unnamed 
clade including Y. kopchicki and E. ernsti is supported by a single synapomorphy: 36 (1), basipter-
ygoid process posteroventrolaterally oriented. This clade lacks the three synapomorphies uniting 
Scelidosaurus + Ankylosauria, namely: 14 (1), skull (non- supraorbital) osteoderms present; 17 (2 and 
3), remodeling of the external surface of skull bones partial with few osteoderms or extensively osteo-
derm covered; and 18 (1), postorbital(non- supraorbital) osteoderms present.
The analysis based on the Maidment et al., 2020 data set produced two MPTs with tree lengths of 
269 steps, a Consistency Index of 0.605 and a Retention Index of 0.663. A strict consensus of the trees 
is shown in Figure 16B. This analysis recovered Yuxisaurus within Thyreophora, as an early diverging 
branch between Emausaurus and Scelidosaurus. Ankylosauromorpha (neither sensu Carpenter, 2001 
nor sensu Norman, 2021; see below) was not recovered, Scutellosaurus and Emausaurus were found 
outside of Eurypoda, and the Emausaurus + Yuxisaurus clade was not identified. Yuxisaurus has a 
single unambiguous synapomorphy of Thyreophora: 29 (1) maxillary tooth row inset medially from 
the lateral surface. It is grouped with Scelidosaurus and Eurypoda to the exclusion of Emausaurus in 
having the following synapomorphies: 32 (1) supraorbital elements form the dorsal rim of the orbit; 
and 110 (1) ‘U’-shaped cervical collars composed of keeled scutes present. Yuxisaurus is excluded 
from the Scelidosaurus + Eurypoda clade as it lacks the unambiguous synapomorphy of the latter 
group: 57 (0) cervical vertebrae longer anteroposteriorly than wide transversely.
Comments on Ankylosauromorpha
Carpenter, 2001 conducted a phylogenetic analysis that recovered a monophyletic Eurypoda split 
into two sister lineages, Stegosauria and Scelidosaurus + Ankylosauria, with Emausaurus and Scute-
llosaurus as successive outgroups to Eurypoda. This result contrasted with previous results where 
Scelidosaurus was excluded from Eurypoda (e.g., Sereno, 1986; Sereno, 1999). To recognize the 
new Scelidosaurus + Ankylosauria clade Carpenter, 2001 (p. 471) proposed the name Ankylosauro-
morpha, which he defined thus: ‘Ankylosauromorpha are thyreophorans that are closer to Scelido-
saurus, Minmi, Polacanthidae, Nodosauridae, and Ankylosauridae, than to Stegosaurus’. However, 
the ‘ankylosauromorph hypothesis,’ was not supported by later analyses, which failed to reproduce 
this result and consistently placed Scelidosaurus outside Eurypoda (e.g., Norman et al., 2004; Butler 
et al., 2008; Boyd, 2015; Dieudonné et al., 2021).
Subsequently, a new phylogenetic analysis by Norman, 2021 provided additional support for a 
sister- group relationship between Scelidosaurus and Ankylosauria. However, this analysis also recov-
ered Emausaurus and Scutellosaurus as outgroups to this clade, with all of these taxa more closely 
related to ankylosaurs than stegosaurs. This prompted Norman, 2021 to expand the Carpenter, 
2001 ankylosauromorph concept to encompass these additional taxa, even though the latter author 
did not include them within his original definition. The (Norman, 2021) new definition for Ankylo-
sauromorpha was: ‘All taxa more closely related to Euoplocephalus and Edmontonia than to Stego-
saurus.’ However, this definition is functionally identical to the existing stem- based definitions of 
Ankylosauria provided by Carpenter, 1997: ‘All thyreophoran ornithischians closer to Ankylosaurus 
than to Stegosaurus’ and Sereno, 1998: ‘All eurypods closer to Ankylosaurus than Stegosaurus’’. 
Hence, the tree topology provided by Norman, 2021 implies that Scutellosaurus, Emausaurus, Yuxi-
saurus, and Scelidosaurus are ankylosaurs under these previous and broadly applied phylogenetic 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
30 of 37
definitions; consequently, the Norman, 2021 stem- based use of ‘Ankylosauromorpha’ is in error and 
his redefinition of the clade redundant. However, if the Norman, 2021 topology were to receive 
further support in future, a case could be made for a node- based definition of Ankylosauromorpha 
(e.g., a clade consisting of Scelidosaurus, Ankylosaurus, their common ancestor and all of its descen-
dants) or some other variation.
Thyreophoran biogeography
The discovery of Yuxisaurus cements the presence of armored dinosaurs in the Early Jurassic of 
Eastern Asia, an observation previously supported by the fragmentary material assigned to ‘Tatisaurus’ 
and ‘Bienosaurus’ (Simmons, 1965; Dong, 2001). The inadequate holotype specimens of the latter 
taxa do not allow them to be incorporated into formal phylogenetic or macroevolutionary analyses 
(Norman et al., 2007; Raven et al., 2019), and the only other Early Jurassic thyreophoran material 
reported from Asia—from the Kota Formation of India (Nath et al., 2002; Galton, 2019)—is also frus-
tratingly incomplete (and might be of Middle Jurassic age: Prasad and Parmar, 2020). Moreover, it is 
worth noting that India was part of Gondwana during the Jurassic and so its fauna would likely have 
been biogeographically distinct from that occurring in China, which formed part of Laurasia. Hence, 
it has been impossible to include any early diverging Asian taxa in broad- scale tree- based analyses of 
early thyreophoran evolutionary history thus far. However, the more complete, and highly distinctive, 
material of Yuxisaurus enables some more substantive discussion of these issues.
For example, until relatively recently all of the valid Early Jurassic thyreophoran taxa included in 
such analyses were from North America (Scutellosaurus) or Europe (Emausaurus and Scelidosaurus) 
limiting our ability to determine their biogeographic history beyond suggesting a Laurasian distribu-
tion (e.g., Sereno, 1999; Norman et al., 2004). However, new phylogenetic analyses have proposed 
that two other taxa, Lesothosaurus and Laquintasaura, might be early members of Thyreophora (e.g., 
Butler et al., 2008; Boyd, 2015; Baron et al., 2017a; Raven and Maidment, 2017; Maidment et al., 
2020), although these views are contentious and alternative relationships for these taxa have been 
posited (e.g., Dieudonné et al., 2021; Barta and Norell, 2021; Norman, 2021). If Lesothosaurus 
and Laquintasaura are thyreophorans, however, this broadens the palaeogeographic distribution of 
the clade to Gondwana in the earliest Jurassic, with Laquintasaura from the Hettangian of Venezuela 
(Barrett et al., 2014) and Lesothosaurus from the Sinemurian of southern Africa (Viglietti et al., 
2020), implying that the group might have originated in Gondwana and dispersed to Laurasia (Boyd, 
2015; Raven et al., 2019; Maidment et al., 2020). If it is of the Early Jurassic age, the material from 
the Kota Formation would support an early Gondwanan distribution also (Nath et al., 2002; Galton, 
2019).
The two phylogenetic analyses, we selected to assess the relationships of Yuxisaurus reflect 
differing opinions on the relationships of Lesothosaurus and underscore current uncertainties in early 
ornithischian biogeography. In our iteration of the Norman, 2021 analysis (see Results, above), Leso-
thosaurus is recovered as a non- thyreophoran ornithischian and, as a result, Yuxisaurus belongs to 
a grade of early diverging thyreophoran taxa whose entire early evolutionary history is confined to 
Laurasia. This scenario implies that all later- occurring Gondwanan taxa were dispersals from Eurasia. 
The sister- group relationship of Yuxisaurus and Emausaurus implies a pan- Eurasian distribution for this 
small clade, but taken with the North American distribution of the earlier- diverging Scutellosaurus 
and the European occurrence of the later- diverging Scelidosaurus, there is no clear biogeographic 
signal within the broader Laurasian region. By contrast, the tree topology gained from analysis of 
the Maidment et al., 2020 data set (see Results, above) recovers Laquintasaura as a thyreophoran, 
which might imply a greater role for Gondwana in the origin of the group although it still recovers 
Yuxisaurus as a member of a primarily Laurasian radiation. Unfortunately, the lack of consensus on 
early ornithischian phylogeny prevents us from choosing between these scenarios: specimens from 
currently unsampled areas, new anatomical data, and agreement on character coding and scoring 
decisions will be required to move this debate forwards.
Minimally, however, the recognition of Yuxisaurus further highlights that thyreophorans achieved a 
global (or at least pan- Laurasian) distribution rapidly during their early history, perhaps in the space of 
only 2–3 million years (up to a maximum of ~10 Ma) (see also Raven et al., 2019). This time scale is 
suggested by the current absence of Triassic ornithischians (unless silesaurids are considered members 
of this clade: Müller and Garcia, 2020) and the occurrences of the earliest diverging members of 
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
31 of 37
Thyreophora, which all have potential first appearance dates ranging from Hettangian–Sinemurian 
(201.3–190.8 Ma: Walker et al., 2018).
Early thyreophorans have been recovered in a diverse range of palaeoenvironmental and tapho-
nomic settings and as components of remarkably different ecosystems, suggesting that their early 
radiation might have been underpinned by greater ecological diversity among them than usually 
appreciated. For example, Lesothosaurus, Laquintasaura, and Scutellosaurus were likely obligate 
bipeds (Thulborn, 1972; Colbert, 1981; Barrett et al., 2014), whereas the more heavily built Yuxis-
aurus and Scelidosaurus were likely quadrupeds (Maidment et al., 2014; Norman, 2021). Moreover, 
there is some evidence of dietary variation with the possibility that Lesothosaurus was a facultative 
omnivore (Barrett, 2000), whereas Scelidosaurus is thought to have been an obligate herbivore 
(Barrett, 2001; Norman, 2021). Early members of the clade, like Lesothosaurus and Laquintasaura, 
were apparently unarmored (Thulborn, 1972; Barrett et al., 2014), but armor became a conspicuous 
feature of all later- diverging members of the group (Norman et al., 2004) and varied considerably 
even in the earliest appearing taxa (Colbert, 1981; Norman, 2020b; this paper). Several early exper-
iments in sociality and group- living are inferred based on mass accumulations of several taxa (Barrett 
et al., 2014; Barrett et al., 2016). In terms of habitats, Emausaurus and Scelidosaurus are known 
from marine settings (Haubold, 1990; Norman, 2020c), suggesting that they lived in low- lying well- 
watered coastal areas, but other taxa, such as Lesothosaurus are known from settings that were far 
inland and at least seasonally arid (Viglietti et al., 2020). Finally, several thyreophorans represent the 
most abundant dinosaur taxa known from their respective formations (e.g., Scelidosaurus, Scutello-
saurus, and Laquintasaura which are each represented by multiple specimens: Colbert, 1981; Barrett 
et al., 2014; Norman, 2020c; Breeden et al., 2021), but in other cases, they seem to be subordi-
nate components of their ecosystems (e.g., Lesothosaurus is known from multiple specimens but is 
much less abundant than the sauropodomorph dinosaurs from the upper Elliot Formation: Knoll, 
2005; Viglietti et al., 2020) or rather rare (e.g., Yuxisaurus, which also occurs in a sauropodomorph- 
dominated fauna: Mao et al., 2019).
Conclusions
A partial skeleton collected from the Lower Jurassic Fengjiahe Formation of Yunnan Province, China, 
represents a new taxon of early diverging thyreophoran dinosaur, which we name Y. kopchicki 
(Figure 17). It can be distinguished from all other thyreophorans by a suite of autapomorphic cranial, 
axial and appendicular character states, as well as a unique combination of character states. Yuxis-
aurus represents the first unambiguous armored dinosaur to be recovered from the Lower Jurassic 
of Asia that is based on associated, diagnostic material and is the first that is complete enough to 
be incorporated into a phylogenetic analysis. Although its relationships are heavily dependent on 
the preferred data set, our analyses recover Yuxisaurus as an outgroup to either Scelidosaurus + 
Ankylosauria or Scelidosaurus + Eurypoda, with the former analysis also suggesting a sister- group 
relationship to the European taxon Emausaurus. Yuxisaurus helps to emphasize the pan- Laurasian (and 
Figure 17. Life restoration of Yuxisaurus kopchicki. The osteoderm arrangement is hypothetical but that includes many of the types of armor found with 
the skeleton.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
32 of 37
possibly global) distribution of early thyreophorans, their diverse morphology and ecology, and the 
rapidity of their initial radiation.
Materials and methods
Phylogenetic analysis
In order to investigate the phylogenetic position of Y. kopchicki, it was scored into two recently 
published data matrices incorporating other early diverging thyreophorans (Maidment et al., 2020; 
Norman, 2021) that differ in their taxonomic coverage and in the relationships recovered among 
these taxa.
Norman’s (2021) original analysis included 18 taxa scored for 115 characters. We added three 
new characters: 116, lacrimal ramus of jugal directed horizontally (0) or posteroventrally (1); 117, 
cervical osteoderms, absent (0), present (1); and 118, surface texture of osteoderms, pitted (0) or 
smooth (1). With the addition of Yuxisaurus, this resulted in a data set composed of 19 taxa and 118 
characters. The data matrix was compiled in Mesquite v. 2.72 (Maddison and Maddison, 2007) and 
was analyzed using TNT v. 1.1 (Goloboff et al., 2008). Following the protocols in Norman, 2021, 
Silesaurus opolensis was designated as the outgroup and all characters were of equal weight and 
unordered. Norman, 2021 analyzed his data using both Branch and Bound and heuristic searches with 
Tree Bisection- Reconnection in PAUP, whereas our analysis used a ‘traditional’ heuristic search with 
one random seed and 1000 replicates of Wagner trees.
When scores for Y. kopchicki were added to the Maidment et al., 2020 matrix this resulted in a 
data set composed of 26 taxa and 115 morphological characters. The matrix was analyzed in TNT v. 
1.1 using ‘traditional’ heuristic search with one random seed and 1000 replicates of Wagner trees. 
Following the original settings used in Maidment et al., 2020, Pisanosaurus was assigned as the 
outgroup, and all characters were equally weighted, and characters 105 and 106 were ordered, as 
were the continuous characters (characters 1–24).
Bremer supports were calculated for both analyses by sequentially increasing the search depth to 
a maximum hold of 11,000 optimal trees and 6 suboptimal trees in memory to test the robustness of 
each node.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the field crew of Yimen Administration of Cultural Heritage for their 
efforts in the discovery, excavation, and preliminary preparation of this specimen. The authors thank 
X Hou and Y He for assistance; Z Yang for preparation; Y Chen and R Jiang for help with illustration; 
and H Xing and S Maidment for suggestions and discussion. The authors are grateful to the reviewers 
Attila Ősi and Benjamin Breeden III for their constructive critiques that greatly improved the manu-
script. The phylogenetic analysis software TNT version 1.1 was provided by generosity of the Willi 
Hennig Society. Support for this research is from the Double First- Class joint program of Science & 
Technology Department of Yunnan and Yunnan University (2018FY001- 005).
Additional information
Funding
Funder
Grant reference number
Author
Double First-Class joint 
program of Science & 
Technology Department 
of Yunnan and Yunnan 
University
2018FY001-005
Shundong Bi
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the 
decision to submit the work for publication.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
33 of 37
Author contributions
Xi Yao, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – orig-
inal draft; Paul M Barrett, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing – original 
draft; Lei Yang, Resources; Xing Xu, Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing - review and editing; 
Shundong Bi, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, 
Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing - review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Paul M Barrett    http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0412-3000
Xing Xu    http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4786-9948
Shundong Bi    http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0620-187X
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248.sa1
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248.sa2
Additional files
Supplementary files
•  Supplementary file 1. Data matrix modified from Norman, 2021 used in the phylogenetic analysis 
(in txt format).
•  Supplementary file 2. Data matrix modified from Maidment et al., 2020 used in the phylogenetic 
analysis (in txt format).
•  Transparent reporting form 
Data availability
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and Supplementary 
Information.
References
Arbour VM, Currie PJ. 2015. Systematics, phylogeny and palaeobiogeography of the ankylosaurid dinosaurs. 
Journal of Systematic Palaeontology 14:385–444. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/14772019.2015.1059985
Bai Z, Yang J, Wang G. 1990. Yimenosaurus, a new genus of Prosauropoda from Yimen County, Yunnan Province. 
Yuxiwenbo 1:14–23.
Bai Z. 1999. Dinosaur fauna from Yuxi area, Yunnan Province. Wang YQ, Deng T (Eds). Proceedings of the 
Seventh Annual Meeting of the Chinese Society of Vertebrate Paleontology. Beijing: China Ocean Press. p. 
109–116.
Baron MG, Norman DB, Barrett PM. 2017a. A new hypothesis of dinosaur relationships and early dinosaur 
evolution. Nature 543:501–506. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21700, PMID: 28332513
Baron MG, Norman DB, Barrett PM. 2017b. Postcranial anatomy of Lesothosaurus diagnosticus (Dinosauria: 
Ornithischia) from the Lower Jurassic of southern Africa: implications for basal ornithischian taxonomy and 
systematics. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 179:125–168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/zoj.12434
Barrett PM. 2000. Prosauropods and iguanas: speculation on the diets of extinct reptiles. Sues HD (Ed). 
Evolution of Herbivory in Terrestrial Vertebrates: Perspectives from the Fossil Record. Cambridge University 
Press. p. 42–78.
Barrett PM. 2001. Tooth wear and possible jaw action of Scelidosaurus harrisonii Owen and a review of feeding 
mechanisms in other thyreophoran dinosaurs. Carpenter K (Ed). The Armored Dinosaurs. Indiana University 
Press. p. 25–52.
Barrett PM, Butler RJ, Mundil R, Scheyer TM, Irmis RB, Sánchez- Villagra MR. 2014. A palaeoequatorial 
ornithischian and new constraints on early dinosaur diversification. Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 
Biological Sciences 281:20141147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.1147, PMID: 25100698
Barrett PM, Butler RJ, Yates AM, Baron MG, Choiniere JN. 2016. New specimens of the basal ornithischian 
dinosaur Lesothosaurus diagnosticus Galton, 1978 from the Early Jurassic of South Africa. Palaeontologia 
Africana 50:48–63.DOI: https://doi.org/doi:http://wiredspace.wits.ac.za/handle/10539/19886
Barta DE, Norell MA. 2021. The osteology of Haya griva (Dinosauria: Ornithischia) from the Late Cretaceous of 
Mongolia. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 445:445.1.1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1206/ 
0003-0090.445.1.1
Blows WT. 2001. Dermal armor of the polacanthine dinosaurs. Carpenter K (Ed). The Armored Dinosaurs. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. p. 363–385.DOI: https://doi.org/10.1206/0003-0090. 
445.1.1
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
34 of 37
Blows WT, Honeysett K. 2014. First Valanginian Polacanthus foxii (Dinosauria, Ankylosauria) from England, from 
the Lower Cretaceous of Bexhill, Sussex. Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association 125:233–251. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pgeola.2014.01.002
Boyd CA. 2015. The systematic relationships and biogeographic history of ornithischian dinosaurs. PeerJ 
3:e1523. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1523, PMID: 26713260
Breeden BT, Rowe TB. 2020. New specimens of Scutellosaurus lawleri Colbert, 1981, from the Lower Jurassic 
Kayenta Formation in Arizona elucidate the early evolution of thyreophoran dinosaurs. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology 40:e1791894. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/02724634.2020.1791894
Breeden BT, Raven TJ, Butler RJ, Rowe TB, Maidment SCR. 2021. The anatomy and palaeobiology of the early 
armoured dinosaur Scutellosaurus lawleri (Ornithischia: Thyreophora) from the Kayenta Formation (Lower 
Jurassic) of Arizona. Royal Society Open Science 8:201676. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.201676, PMID: 
34295511
Brochu CA. 1996. Closure of neurocentral sutures during crocodilian ontogeny: Implications for maturity 
assessment in fossil archosaurs. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 16:49–62. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02724634.1996.10011283
Bunzel E. 1871. Die Reptilfauna Der Gosau- Formation in Der Neuen Welt Bei Wiener- Neustadt. Wein: Hölder.
Burns ME, Currie PJ. 2014. External and internal structure of ankylosaur (Dinosauria, Ornithischia) osteoderms 
and their systematic relevance. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 34:835–851. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02724634.2014.840309
Butler RJ, Upchurch P, Norman DB. 2008. The phylogeny of the ornithischian dinosaurs. Journal of Systematic 
Palaeontology 6:1–40. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S1477201907002271
Carpenter K. 1984. Skeletal reconstruction and life restoration of Sauropelta (Ankylosauria: Nodosauridae) from 
the Cretaceous of North America. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 21:1491–1498. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1139/e84-154
Carpenter K. 1997. Ankylosauria. Currie PJ, Padian K (Eds). Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs. San Diego: Academic 
Press. p. 16–20.
Carpenter K, Miles C, Cloward K. 1998. Skull of a Jurassic ankylosaur (Dinosauria). Nature 393:782–783. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/31684
Carpenter K. 2001. Phylogenetic analysis of the Ankylosauria. Carpenter K (Ed). The Armored Dinosaurs. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. p. 455–483.
Carpenter K, Hayashi S, Kobayashi Y, Maryańska T, Barsbold R, Sato K, Obata I. 2011. Saichania chulsanensis 
(Ornithischia, Ankylosauridae) from the Upper Cretaceous of Mongolia. Palaeontographica Abteilung A 
294:1–61. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1127/pala/294/2011/1
Chen PJ, Li WB, Chen JH, Ye CH, Wang Z, Shen YB, Sun DL. 1982. Stratigraphical classification of Jurassic and 
Cretaceous in China. Scientia Sinica (Series B) 25:1227–1248.
Colbert EH. 1981. A primitive ornithischian dinosaur from the Kayenta Formation of Arizona. Museum of 
Northern Arizona Bulletin 53:1–61.
Dieudonné PE, Cruzado- Caballero P, Godefroit P, Tortosa T. 2021. A new phylogeny of cerapodan dinosaurs. 
Historical Biology 33:2335–2355. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/08912963.2020.1793979
Dong ZM. 2001. Primitive armored dinosaur from the Lufeng Basin in China. Tanke DH, Carpenter K (Eds). 
Mesozoic Vertebrate Life. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. p. 237–243.
Eaton TH. 1960. A new armored dinosaur from the Cretaceous of Kansas. University of Kansas, Paleontological 
Contributions (Vertebrata) 8:1–24.
Fang XS, Li PX, Zhang ZJ, Cheng ZW, Pang QQ, Zhang ZX, Huang BC. 2008. The Jurassic Red. Wang J (Ed). 
Jurassic Red Beds in Central Yunnan. Beijing: Geological Publishing House. p. 1–111.
Ford T. 2000. A review of ankylosaur osteoderms from New Mexico and a preliminary review of ankylosaur 
armor. New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin 17:157–176.
Galton PM. 1983. Armored dinosaurs (Ornithischia: Ankylosauria) from the Middle and Upper Jurassic of Europe. 
Palaeontographica, Abteilung A 182:1–25.
Galton PM. 1988. Skull bones and endocranial casts of the stegosaurian dinosaur Kentrosaurus Hennig, 1915 
from the Upper Jurassic of Tanzania, East Africa. Geologica et Paleontologica 22:123–143.
Galton PM. 2004. Stegosauria. Weishampel DB, Dodson P, Osmólska H (Eds). The Dinosauria. Second Edition. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 343–362. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1525/california/9780520242098. 
001.0001
Galton PM. 2019. Earliest record of an ankylosaurian dinosaur (Ornithischia: Thyreophora): Dermal armor from 
Lower Kota Formation (Lower Jurassic) of India. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - 
Abhandlungen 291:205–219. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1127/njgpa/2019/0800
Gilmore CW. 1914. Osteology of the armored Dinosauria in the United States National Museum, with special 
reference to the genus Stegosaurus. Bulletin of the United States National Museum 89:1–143. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.5962/bhl.title.63658
Godefroit P, Pereda- Suberbiola X, Li H, Dong ZM. 1999. A new species of the ankylosaurid dinosaur 
Pinacosaurus from the Late Cretaceous of Inner Mongolia (PR China). Bulletin de l’Institut Royal des Sciences 
Naturelles de Belgique, Sciences de la Terre 69:17–36.
Goloboff PA, Farris JS, Nixon KC. 2008. TNT, a free program for phylogenetic analysis. Cladistics 24:774–786. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1096-0031.2008.00217.x
Haubold H. 1990. Ein neuer Dinosaurier (Ornithischia, Thyreophora) aus dem unteren Jura des nordlichen 
Mitteleuropa. Revue de Paleobiologie 9:149–177.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
35 of 37
Huang B, Li Y, Fang X, Sun D, Pang Q, Cheng Z, Li P. 2005. Magnetostratigraphy of the Jurassic in Lufeng, 
central Yunnan. Geological Bulletin of China 24:322–328.
Kilbourne B, Carpenter K. 2005. Redescription of Gargoyleosaurus parkpinorum, a polacanthid ankylosaur from 
the Upper Jurassic of Albany County, Wyoming. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - 
Abhandlungen 237:111–160. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1127/njgpa/237/2005/111
Kinneer B, Carpenter K, Shaw A. 2016. Redescription of Gastonia burgei (Dinosauria: Ankylosauria, 
Polacanthidae), and description of a new species. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - 
Abhandlungen 282:37–80. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1127/njgpa/2016/0605
Kirkland JI, Carpenter K. 1994. North America’s first pre- Cretaceous ankylosaur (Dinosauria) from the Upper 
Jurassic Morrison Formation of western Colorado. Brigham Young University Geology Studies 40:25-42.
Kirkland JI, Alcalá L, Loewen MA, Espílez E, Mampel L, Wiersma JP. 2013. The basal nodosaurid ankylosaur 
Europelta carbonensis n. gen., n. sp. from the Lower Cretaceous (lower Albian) Escucha Formation of 
northeastern Spain. PLOS ONE 8:e80405. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080405, PMID: 
24312471
Knoll F. 2005. The tetrapod fauna of the Upper Elliot and Clarens formations in the main Karoo Basin (South 
Africa and Lesotho). Bulletin de La Société Géologique de France 176:81–91. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2113/ 
176.1.81
Lee YN. 1996. A new nodosaurid ankylosaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia) from the Paw Paw Formation (Late Albian) 
of Texas. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 16:232–245. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/02724634.1996. 
10011311
Luo ZX, Wu XC. 1994. The small tetrapods of the Lower Lufeng Formation, Yunnan, China. Fraser NC, Sues HD 
(Eds). In the Shadow of the Dinosaurs: Early Mesozoic Tetrapods. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 
251–270.
Maddison W, Maddison D. 2007. Mesquite 2. A modular system for evolutionary analysis. 3.70. Mesquite 2. 
http://www.mesquiteproject.org
Maidment SCR, Bates KT, Falkingham PL, VanBuren C, Arbour V, Barrett PM. 2014. Locomotion in ornithischian 
dinosaurs: an assessment using three- dimensional computational modelling. Biological Reviews 89:588–617. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12071, PMID: 24251809
Maidment SCR, Brassey C, Barrett PM. 2015. The postcranial skeleton of an exceptionally complete individual of 
the plated dinosaur Stegosaurus stenops (Dinosauria: Thyreophora) from the Upper Jurassic Morrison 
Formation of Wyoming, U.S.A. PLOS ONE 10:e0138352. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0138352, 
PMID: 26466098
Maidment SCR, Raven TJ, Ouarhache D, Barrett PM. 2020. North Africa’s first stegosaur: Implications for 
Gondwanan thyreophoran dinosaur diversity. Gondwana Research 77:82–97. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr. 
2019.07.007
Maidment SCR, Strachan SJ, Ouarhache D, Scheyer TM, Brown EE, Fernandez V, Johanson Z, Raven TJ, 
Barrett PM. 2021. Bizarre dermal armour suggests the first African ankylosaur. Nature Ecology & Evolution 
5:1576–1581. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-021-01553-6, PMID: 34556830
Maleev EA. 1956. Armored dinosaurs from the Upper Cretaceous of Mongolia. Trudy Paleontologiceskogo 
Instituta Akademii Nauk SSSR 62:22928.
Mao L, Xing L, Zhang JP, Wang T, Wang DH. 2019. Revisiting the world famous Lufeng Formation dinosaur fauna: 
new approaches to old problems. Historical Biology 32:1062–1070. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/08912963. 
2018.1563784
Maryanska T. 1971. New data on the skull of Pinacosaurus grangeri (Ankylosauria). Palaeontologia Polonica 
25:45–53.
Maryanska T. 1977. Ankylosauridae (Dinosauria) from Mongolia. Palaeontologia Polonica 37:85–151.
Müller RT, Garcia MS. 2020. A paraphyletic “Silesauridae” as an alternative hypothesis for the initial radiation of 
ornithischian dinosaurs. Biology Letters 16:20200417. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2020.0417, PMID: 
32842895
Nath TT, Yadagiri P, Moitra AK. 2002. First record of armoured dinosaur from the Lower Jurassic Kota 
Formation, Pranhita- Godavari Valley, Andhra Pradesh. Journal of the Geological Society of India 59:575–
576.
Nopcsa F. 1915. Die Dinosaurier der Siebenbürgischen Landesteile Ungarns. Mitteilungen aus dem Jahrbuche 
der Königlich Ungarischen Geologischen Anstalt 23:1–26.
Norman DB, Witmer LM, Weishampel DB. 2004. Basal Thyreophora. Weishampel DB, Dodson P, Osmólska H 
(Eds). The Dinosauria. Second Edition. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 335–342. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1525/california/9780520242098.003.0018
Norman DB, Butler RJ, Maidment SCR. 2007. Reconsidering the status and affinities of the ornithischian dinosaur 
Tatisaurus oehleri Simmons, 1965. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 150:865–874. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1111/j.1096-3642.2007.00301.x
Norman DB. 2020a. Scelidosaurus harrisonii from the Early Jurassic of Dorset, England: cranial anatomy. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 188:1–81. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/zoolinnean/zlz074
Norman DB. 2020b. Scelidosaurus harrisonii from the Early Jurassic of Dorset, England: postcranial skeleton. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 189:47–157. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/zoolinnean/zlz078
Norman DB. 2020c. Scelidosaurus harrisonii from the Early Jurassic of Dorset, England: the dermal skeleton. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 190:1–53. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/zoolinnean/zlz085
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
36 of 37
Norman DB. 2021. Scelidosaurus harrisonii (Dinosauria: Ornithischia) from the Early Jurassic of Dorset, England: 
biology and phylogenetic relationships. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 191:1–86. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaa061
Ősi A. 2005. Hungarosaurus tormai, a new ankylosaur (Dinosauria) from the Upper Cretaceous of Hungary. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 25:370–383. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1671/0272-4634(2005) 
025[0370:HTANAD]2.0.CO;2
Ősi A, Botfalvai G, Albert G, Hajdu Z. 2019. The dirty dozen: taxonomical and taphonomical overview of a 
unique ankylosaurian (Dinosauria: Ornithischia) assemblage from the Santonian Iharkút locality, Hungary. 
Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments 99:195–240. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12549-018-0362-z
Owen R. 1842. Report on British fossil reptiles. Reports of the British Association for the Advancement of 
Science 11:60–204.
Owen R. 1861. Monograph on the British fossil Reptilia from the Oolitic Formations. Part One. A monograph of 
a fossil dinosaur (Scelidosaurus harrisonii, Owen). Palaeontographical Society Monographs 13:1–14. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02693445.1861.12027929
Owen R. 1863. Monograph on the British fossil Reptilia from the Oolitic Formations. Part Two. Scelidosaurus 
harrisonii. Palaeontographical Society Monographs 14:1–26. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/02693445.1863. 
12027933
Padian K. 1989. Presence of the dinosaur Scelidosaurus indicates Jurassic age for the Kayenta Formation (Glen 
Canyon Group, northern Arizona). Geology 17:438. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1130/0091-7613(1989) 
017<0438:POTDSI>2.3.CO;2
Pang Q, Fang X, Zhang Z, Ya L, Li P, Cheng Z. 2002. Establishment of the Yubacun Formation and the lower 
boundary of the continental Jurassic in central Yunnan. Geological Review 48:1–8. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
16509/j.georeview.2002.01.001
Pereda- Suberbiola X, Galton PM. 2001. Reappraisal of the nodosaurid ankylosaur Struthiosaurus austriacus 
Bunzel from the Upper Cretaceous Gosau Beds of Austria. Carpenter K (Ed). The Armored Dinosaurs. 
Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. p. 173–184.
Peyre de Fabrègues C, Bi S, Li H, Li G, Yang L, Xu X. 2020. A new species of early- diverging Sauropodiformes 
from the Lower Jurassic Fengjiahe Formation of Yunnan Province, China. Scientific Reports 10:10961. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-67754-4, PMID: 32620800
Porro LB, Witmer LM, Barrett PM. 2015. Digital preparation and osteology of the skull of Lesothosaurus 
diagnosticus (Ornithischia: Dinosauria). PeerJ 3:e1494. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1494, PMID: 
26713245
Prasad GVR, Parmar V. 2020. First ornithischian and theropod dinosaur teeth from the Middle Jurassic Kota 
Formation of India: paleobiogeographic relationships. Prasad G, Patnaik R (Eds). New Perspectives on 
Post- Gondwana Break- up – A Tribute to Ashok Sahni. Switzerland: Springer Nature. p. 1–30. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-030-49753-8_1
Raven TJ, Maidment SCR. 2017. A new phylogeny of Stegosauria (Dinosauria, Ornithischia). Palaeontology 
60:401–408. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/pala.12291
Raven TJ, Barrett PM, Xu X, Maidment SCR. 2019. A reassessment of the purported ankylosaurian dinosaur 
Bienosaurus lufengensis from the Lower Lufeng Formation of Yunnan, People’s Republic of China. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica 64:335–342. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4202/app.00577.2018
Rosenbaum JN, Padian K. 2000. New material of the basal thyreophoran Scutellosaurus lawleri from the Kayenta 
Formation (Lower Jurassic) of Arizona. PaleoBios 20:13–23.
Salgado L, Canudo JI, Garrido AC, Moreno- Azanza M, Martínez LCA, Coria RA, Gasca JM. 2017. A new primitive 
neornithischian dinosaur from the Jurassic of Patagonia with gut contents. Scientific Reports 7:42778. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep42778, PMID: 28202910
Seeley HG. 1881. The Reptile Fauna of the Gosau Formation preserved in the Geological Museum of the 
University of Vienna: With a Note on the Geological Horizon of the Fossils at Neue Welt, west of Wiener 
Neustadt, by Edw. Suess, Ph.D., F.M.G.S., &c., Professor of Geology in the University of Vienna, &c. Quarterly 
Journal of the Geological Society 37:620–706. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1144/GSL.JGS.1881.037.01-04.49
Seeley HG. 1887. I. On the classification of the fossil animals commonly named Dinosauria. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London 43:165–171. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspl.1887.0117
Sereno PC. 1986. Phylogeny of the bird- hipped dinosaurs (Order Ornithischia). National Geographic Research 
2:234–256.
Sereno PC. 1991. Lesothosaurus, “Fabrosaurids,” and the early evolution of Ornithischia. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology 11:168–197. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/02724634.1991.10011386
Sereno PC, Dong ZM. 1992. The skull of the basal stegosaur Huayangosaurus taibaii and a cladistic diagnosis of 
Stegosauria. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 12:318–343. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/02724634.1992. 
10011463
Sereno PC. 1998. A rationale for phylogenetic definitions, with application to the higher- level taxonomy of 
Dinosauria. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen 210:41–83. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1127/njgpa/210/1998/41
Sereno PC. 1999. The evolution of dinosaurs. Science 284:2137–2147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.284. 
5423.2137, PMID: 10381873
Simmons DJ. 1965. The non- therapsid reptiles of the Lufeng Basin, Yunnan, China. Fieldiana, Geology 15:1–93.
Thulborn RA. 1972. The postcranial skeleton of the Triassic ornithischian dinosaur Fabrosaurus australis. 
Palaeontology 15:29–60.
 Research article 
Ecology | Evolutionary Biology
Yao, Barrett, et al. eLife 2022;11:e75248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75248
 
37 of 37
Upchurch P, Barrett PM, Zhao XJ, Xu X. 2007. A re- evaluation of Chinshakiangosaurus chunghoensis Ye vide 
Dong 1992 (Dinosauria, Sauropodomorpha): implications for cranial evolution in basal sauropod dinosaurs. 
Geological Magazine 144:247–262. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0016756806003062
Vickaryous MK, Russell AP, Currie PJ, Zhao XJ. 2001. A new ankylosaurid (Dinosauria: Ankylosauria) from the 
Lower Cretaceous of China, with comments on ankylosaurian relationships. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 
38:1767–1780. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1139/e01-051
Vickaryous MK, Russell AP. 2003. A redescription of the skull of Euoplocephalus tutus (Archosauria: 
Ornithischia): a foundation for comparative and systematic studies of ankylosaurian dinosaurs. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society 137:157–186. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1096-3642.2003.00045.x
Vickaryous MK. 2006. New information on the cranial anatomy of Edmontonia rugosidens Gilmore, a Late 
Cretaceous nodosaurid dinosaur from Dinosaur Provincial Park, Alberta. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 
26:1011–1013. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1671/0272-4634(2006)26[1011:NIOTCA]2.0.CO;2
Viglietti PA, McPhee BW, Bordy EM, Sciscio L, Barrett PM, Benson RBJ, Wills S, Chapelle KEJ, Dollman KN, 
Mdekazi C, Choiniere JN. 2020. Biostratigraphy of the Massospondylus Assemblage Zone (Stormberg Group, 
Karoo Supergroup), South Africa. South African Journal of Geology 123:249–262. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
25131/sajg.123.0018
Walker JD, Geissman JW, Bowring SA, Babcock LE. 2018. Geologic Time Scale v. 5.0: Geological Society of 
America. DOI: https://doi.org/doi:/10.1130/2018.CTS005R3C
Wang GF, You HL, Pan SG, Wang T. 2017. A new crested theropod from the Early Jurassic of Yunnan Province, 
China. Vertebrata PalAsiatica 55:177–186.
Zhen S, Li J, Rao C. 1986. Dinosaur footprints of Jinning, China. Memoirs of the Beijing Natural History Museum 
33:1–19.

